They had barely set foot in the cool entrance hall
when a voice rang out, “There you are, Potter —
Weasley.” Professor McGonagall was walking toward
them, looking stern. “You will both do your detentions
this evening.”
“What’re we doing, Professor?” said Ron, nervously
suppressing a burp.
“ You will be polishing the silver in the trophy room
with Mr. Filch,” said Professor McGonagall. “And no
magic, Weasley — elbow grease.”
Ron gulped. Argus Filch, the caretaker, was loathed
by every student in the school.
“And you, Potter, will be helping Professor Lockhart
answer his fan mail,” said Professor McGonagall.
“Oh n — Professor, can’t I go and do the trophy room,
too?” said Harry desperately.
“Certainly not,” said Professor McGonagall, raising
her eyebrows. “Professor Lockhart requested you
particularly. Eight o’clock sharp, both of you.”
Harry and Ron slouched into the Great Hall in states
of deepest gloom, Hermione behind them, wearing a
well-you-did-break-school-rules sort of expression.
Harry didn’t enjoy his shepherd’s pie as much as he’d
thought. Both he and Ron felt they’d got the worse
deal.
“Filch ’ll have me there all night,” said Ron heavily.
“No magic! There must be about a hundred cups in
that room. I’m no good at Muggle cleaning.”
“I’d swap anytime,” said Harry hollowly. “I’ve had
loads of practice with the Dursleys. Answering
Lockhart’s fan mail ... he’ll be a nightmare. ...”
Saturday afternoon seemed to melt away, and in what
seemed like no time, it was five minutes to eight, and
Harry was dragging his feet along the second-floor
corridor to Lockhart’s office. He gritted his teeth and
knocked.
The door flew open at once. Lockhart beamed down at
him.
“Ah, here’s the scalawag!” he said. “Come in, Harry,
come in — ”
Shining brightly on the walls by the light of many
candles were countless framed photographs of
Lockhart. He had even signed a few of them. Another
large pile lay on his desk.
“You can address the envelopes!” Lockhart told Harry,
as though this was a huge treat. “This first one’s to
Gladys Gudgeon, bless her — huge fan of mine — ”
The minutes snailed by. Harry let Lockhart’s voice
wash over him, occasionally saying, “Mmm” and
“Right” and “Yeah.” Now and then he caught a phrase
like, “Fame’s a fickle friend, Harry,” or “Celebrity is as
celebrity does, remember that.”
The candles burned lower and lower, making the light
dance over the many moving faces of Lockhart
watching him. Harry moved his aching hand over
what felt like the thousandth envelope, writing out
Veronica Smethley’s address. It must be nearly time to
leave, Harry thought miserably, please let it be nearly
time. ...
And then he heard something — something quite
apart from the spitting of the dying candles and
Lockhart’s prattle about his fans.
It was a voice, a voice to chill the bone marrow, a
voice of breathtaking, ice-cold venom.
“Come ... come to me. ... Let me rip you. ... Let me tear
you. ... Let me kill you. ...”
Harry gave a huge jump and a large lilac blot
appeared on Veronica Smethley’s street.
“What?” he said loudly.
“I know!” said Lockhart. “Six solid months at the top
of the best-seller list! Broke all records!”
“No,” said Harry frantically. “That voice!”
“Sorry?” said Lockhart, looking puzzled. “What voice?”
“That — that voice that said — didn’t you hear it?”
Lockhart was looking at Harry in high astonishment.
“What are you talking about, Harry? Perhaps you’re
getting a little drowsy? Great Scott — look at the time!
“We’ve been here nearly four hours! I’d never have
believed it — the time’s flown, hasn’t it?”
Harry didn’t answer. He was straining his ears to hear
the voice again, but there was no sound now except
for Lockhart telling him he mustn’t expect a treat like
this every time he got detention. Feeling dazed, Harry
left.
It was so late that the Gryffindor common room was
almost empty. Harry went straight up to the

dormitory. Ron wasn’t back yet. Harry pulled on his
pajamas, got into bed, and waited. Half an hour later,
Ron arrived, nursing his right arm and bringing a
strong smell of polish into the darkened room.
“My muscles have all seized up,” he groaned, sinking
on his bed. “Fourteen times he made me buff up that
Quidditch Cup before he was satisfied. And then I
had another slug attack all over a Special Award for
Services to the School. Took ages to get the slime off.
. . . How was it with Lockhart?”
Keeping his voice low so as not to wake Neville, Dean,
and Seamus, Harry told Ron exactly what he had
heard.
“And Lockhart said he couldn’t hear it?” said Ron.
Harry could see him frowning in the moonlight.
“D’you think he was lying? But I don’t get it — even
someone invisible would’ve had to open the door.”
“I know,” said Harry, lying back in his four-poster and
staring at the canopy above him. “I don’t get it either.”   THE DEATHDAY PARTY
October arrived, spreading a damp chill over the
grounds and into the castle. Madam Pomfrey, the
nurse, was kept busy by a sudden spate of colds
among the staff and students. Her Pepperup Potion
worked instantly, though it left the drinker smoking
at the ears for several hours afterward. Ginny
Weasley, who had been looking pale, was bullied into
taking some by Percy. The steam pouring from under
her vivid hair gave the impression that her whole
head was on fire.
Raindrops the size of bullets thundered on the castle
windows for days on end; the lake rose, the flower
beds turned into muddy streams, and Hagrid’s
pumpkins swelled to the size of garden sheds. Oliver
Wood’s enthusiasm for regular training sessions,
however, was not dampened, which was why Harry
was to be found, late one stormy Saturday afternoon
a few days before Halloween, returning to Gryffindor
Tower, drenched to the skin and splattered with mud.
Even aside from the rain and wind it hadn’t been a
happy practice session. Fred and George, who had
  been spying on the Slytherin team, had seen for
themselves the speed of those new Nimbus Two
Thousand and Ones. They reported that the Slytherin
team was no more than seven greenish blurs,
shooting through the air like missiles.
As Harry squelched along the deserted corridor he
came across somebody who looked just as
preoccupied as he was. Nearly Headless Nick, the
ghost of Gryffindor Tower, was staring morosely out of
a window, muttering under his breath, "... don’t fulfill
their requirements ... half an inch, if that ...”
“Hello, Nick,” said Harry.
“Hello, hello,” said Nearly Headless Nick, starting and
looking round. He wore a dashing, plumed hat on his
long curly hair, and a tunic with a ruff, which
concealed the fact that his neck was almost
completely severed. He was pale as smoke, and Harry
could see right through him to the dark sky and
torrential rain outside.
“You look troubled, young Potter,” said Nick, folding a
transparent letter as he spoke and tucking it inside
his doublet.
“So do you,” said Harry.
“Ah,” Nearly Headless Nick waved an elegant hand, “a
matter of no importance. ... It’s not as though I really
wanted to join. ... Thought I’d apply, but apparently I
‘don’t fulfill requirements’ — ”
In spite of his airy tone, there was a look of great
bitterness on his face.
“But you would think, wouldn’t you,” he erupted
suddenly, pulling the letter back out of his pocket,

“that getting hit forty-five times in the neck with a
blunt axe would qualify you to join the Headless
Hunt?”
“Oh — yes,” said Harry, who was obviously supposed
to agree.
“I mean, nobody wishes more than I do that it had all
been quick and clean, and my head had come off
properly, I mean, it would have saved me a great deal
of pain and ridicule. However — ” Nearly Headless
Nick shook his letter open and read furiously:
“ ‘We can only accept huntsmen whose heads have
parted company with their bodies. You will appreciate
that it would be impossible otherwise for members to
participate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head-
Juggling and Head Polo. It is with the greatest regret,
therefore, that I must inform you that you do not fulfill
our requirements. With very best wishes, Sir Patrick
Delaney -Podmore.’ ”
Fuming, Nearly Headless Nick stuffed the letter away.
“Half an inch of skin and sinew holding my neck on,
Harry! Most people would think that’s good and
beheaded, but oh, no, it’s not enough for Sir Properly
Decapitated-Podmore . ”
Nearly Headless Nick took several deep breaths and
then said, in a far calmer tone, “So — what’s
bothering you? Anything I can do?”
“No,” said Harry. “Not unless you know where we can
get seven free Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones for
our match against Sly — ”
The rest of Harry’s sentence was drowned out by a
high-pitched mewling from somewhere near his

ankles. He looked down and found himself gazing into
a pair of lamp-like yellow eyes. It was Mrs. Norris, the
skeletal gray cat who was used by the caretaker,
Argus Filch, as a sort of deputy in his endless battle
against students.
“You’d better get out of here, Harry,” said Nick
quickly. “Filch isn’t in a good mood — he’s got the flu
and some third years accidentally plastered frog
brains all over the ceiling in dungeon five. He’s been
cleaning all morning, and if he sees you dripping mud
all over the place — ”
“Right,” said Harry, backing away from the accusing
stare of Mrs. Norris, but not quickly enough. Drawn
to the spot by the mysterious power that seemed to
connect him with his foul cat, Argus Filch burst
suddenly through a tapestry to Harry’s right,
wheezing and looking wildly about for the rule-
breaker. There was a thick tartan scarf bound around
his head, and his nose was unusually purple.
“Filth!” he shouted, his jowls aquiver, his eyes
popping alarmingly as he pointed at the muddy
puddle that had dripped from Harry’s Quidditch
robes. “Mess and muck everywhere! I’ve had enough
of it, I tell you! Follow me, Potter!”
So Harry waved a gloomy good-bye to Nearly Headless
Nick and followed Filch back downstairs, doubling the
number of muddy footprints on the floor.
Harry had never been inside Filch’s office before; it
was a place most students avoided. The room was
dingy and windowless, lit by a single oil lamp
dangling from the low ceiling. A faint smell of fried
fish lingered about the place. Wooden filing cabinets
stood around the walls; from their labels, Harry could
see that they contained details of every pupil Filch

had ever punished. Fred and George Weasley had an
entire drawer to themselves. A highly polished
collection of chains and manacles hung on the wall
behind Filch’s desk. It was common knowledge that
he was always begging Dumbledore to let him
suspend students by their ankles from the ceiling.
Filch grabbed a quill from a pot on his desk and
began shuffling around looking for parchment.
“Dung,” he muttered furiously, “great sizzling dragon
bogies ... frog brains ... rat intestines ... I’ve had
enough of it ... make an example ... where’s the form
... yes ...”
He retrieved a large roll of parchment from his desk
drawer and stretched it out in front of him, dipping
his long black quill into the ink pot.
“ Name ... Harry Potter. Crime ...”
“It was only a bit of mud!” said Harry.
“It’s only a bit of mud to you, boy, but to me it’s an
extra hour scrubbing!” shouted Filch, a drip shivering
unpleasantly at the end of his bulbous nose. “Crime
... befouling the castle ... suggested sentence ...”
Dabbing at his streaming nose, Filch squinted
unpleasantly at Harry, who waited with bated breath
for his sentence to fall.
But as Filch lowered his quill, there was a great
BANG! on the ceiling of the office, which made the oil
lamp rattle.
“PEEVES!” Filch roared, flinging down his quill in a
transport of rage. “I’ll have you this time, I’ll have
you!”
  Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets- J.K. Rowling
And without a backward glance at Harry, Filch ran
flat-footed from the office, Mrs. Norris streaking
alongside him.
Peeves was the school poltergeist, a grinning, airborne
menace who lived to cause havoc and distress. Harry
didn’t much like Peeves, but couldn’t help feeling
grateful for his timing. Hopefully, whatever Peeves
had done (and it sounded as though he’d wrecked
something very big this time) would distract Filch
from Harry.
Thinking that he should probably wait for Filch to
come back, Harry sank into a moth-eaten chair next
to the desk. There was only one thing on it apart from
his half-completed form: a large, glossy, purple
envelope with silver lettering on the front. With a
quick glance at the door to check that Filch wasn’t on
his way back, Harry picked up the envelope and read:
KWIKSPELL
A Correspondence Course in Beginners’ Magic
Intrigued, Harry flicked the envelope open and pulled
out the sheaf of parchment inside. More curly silver
writing on the front page said:
Feel out of step in the world of modern magic? Find
yourself making excuses not to perform simple spells?
Ever been taunted for your woeful wandwork?
There is an answer!
Kwikspell is an all-new, fail-safe, quick-result, easy-
learn course. Hundreds of witches and wizards have
benefited from the Kwikspell method! Madam Z. Nettles of Topsham writes:

“I had no memory for incantations and my potions
were a family joke! Now, after a Kwikspell course, I am
the center of attention at parties and friends beg for the
recipe of my Scintillation Solution!”
Warlock D. J. Prod of Didsbury says:
“My wife used to sneer at my feeble charms, but one
month into your fabulous Kwikspell course and I
succeeded in turning her into a yak!
Thank you, Kwikspell!”
Fascinated, Harry thumbed through the rest of the
envelope’s contents. Why on earth did Filch want a
Kwikspell course? Did this mean he wasn’t a proper
wizard? Harry was just reading “Lesson One: Holding
Your Wand (Some Useful Tips)” when shuffling
footsteps outside told him Filch was coming back.
Stuffing the parchment back into the envelope, Harry
threw it back onto the desk just as the door opened.
Filch was looking triumphant.
“That vanishing cabinet was extremely valuable!” he
was saying gleefully to Mrs. Norris. “We’ll have Peeves
out this time, my sweet — ”
His eyes fell on Harry and then darted to the
Kwikspell envelope, which, Harry realized too late,
was lying two feet away from where it had started.
Filch ’s pasty face went brick red. Harry braced
himself for a tidal wave of fury. Filch hobbled across
to his desk, snatched up the envelope, and threw it
into a drawer.
“Have you — did you read — ?” he sputtered.
“No,” Harry lied quickly.
Filch ’s knobbly hands were twisting together.
“If I thought you’d read my private — not that it’s
mine — for a friend — be that as it may — however — Harry was staring at him, alarmed; Filch had never
looked madder. His eyes were popping, a tic was
going in one of his pouchy cheeks, and the tartan
scarf didn’t help.
“Very well — go — and don’t breathe a word — not
that — however, if you didn’t read — go now, I have to
write up Peeves’ report — go — ”
Amazed at his luck, Harry sped out of the office, up
the corridor, and back upstairs. To escape from
Filch ’s office without punishment was probably some
kind of school record.
“Harry! Harry! Did it work?”
Nearly Headless Nick came gliding out of a classroom.
Behind him, Harry could see the wreckage of a large
black-and-gold cabinet that appeared to have been
dropped from a great height.
“I persuaded Peeves to crash it right over Filch’s
office,” said Nick eagerly. “Thought it might distract
him — ” “Was that you?” said Harry gratefully. “Yeah, it
worked, I didn’t even get detention. Thanks, Nick!”
They set off up the corridor together. Nearly Headless
Nick, Harry noticed, was still holding Sir Patrick’s
rejection letter.

“I wish there was something I could do for you about
the Headless Hunt,” Harry said. Nearly Headless Nick stopped in his tracks and Harry
walked right through him. He wished he hadn’t; it
was like stepping through an icy shower.
“But there is something you could do for me,” said
Nick excitedly. “Harry — would I be asking too much
— but no, you wouldn’t want — ”
“What is it?” said Harry.
“Well, this Halloween will be my five hundredth
deathday,” said Nearly Headless Nick, drawing
himself up and looking dignified.
“Oh,” said Harry, not sure whether he should look
sorry or happy about this. “Right.”
“I’m holding a party down in one of the roomier
dungeons. Friends will be coming from all over the
country. It would be such an honor if you would
attend. Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger would be most
welcome, too, of course — but I daresay you’d rather
go to the school feast?” He watched Harry on
tenterhooks.
“No,” said Harry quickly, “I’ll come — ”
“My dear boy! Harry Potter, at my deathday party!
And” — he hesitated, looking excited — “do you think
you could possibly mention to Sir Patrick how very
frightening and impressive you find me?”
“Of — of course,” said Harry.
Nearly Headless Nick beamed at him.
“A deathday party?” said Hermione keenly when
Harry had changed at last and joined her and Ron in
the common room. “I bet there aren’t many living
people who can say they’ve been to one of those — it’ll
be fascinating!”
“Why would anyone want to celebrate the day they
died?” said Ron, who was halfway through his Potions
homework and grumpy. “Sounds dead depressing to
me....”
Rain was still lashing the windows, which were now
inky black, but inside all looked bright and cheerful.
The firelight glowed over the countless squashy
armchairs where people sat reading, talking, doing
homework or, in the case of Fred and George Weasley,
trying to find out what would happen if you fed a
Filibuster firework to a salamander. Fred had
“rescued” the brilliant orange, fire-dwelling lizard
from a Care of Magical Creatures class and it was
now smoldering gently on a table surrounded by a
knot of curious people.
Harry was at the point of telling Ron and Hermione
about Filch and the Kwikspell course when the
salamander suddenly whizzed into the air, emitting
loud sparks and bangs as it whirled wildly round the
room. The sight of Percy bellowing himself hoarse at
Fred and George, the spectacular display of tangerine
stars showering from the salamander’s mouth, and its
escape into the fire, with accompanying explosions,
drove both Filch and the Kwikspell envelope from
Harry’s mind.
By the time Halloween arrived, Harry was regretting
his rash promise to go to the deathday party. The rest
of the school was happily anticipating their Halloween
feast; the Great Hall had been decorated with the
usual live bats, Hagrid’s vast pumpkins had been

carved into lanterns large enough for three men to sit
in, and there were rumors that Dumbledore had
booked a troupe of dancing skeletons for the
entertainment.
“A promise is a promise,” Hermione reminded Harry
bossily. “You said you’d go to the deathday party.”
So at seven o’clock, Harry, Ron, and Hermione walked
straight past the doorway to the packed Great Hall,
which was glittering invitingly with gold plates and
candles, and directed their steps instead toward the
dungeons.
The passageway leading to Nearly Headless Nick’s
party had been lined with candles, too, though the
effect was far from cheerful: These were long, thin,
jet-black tapers, all burning bright blue, casting a
dim, ghostly light even over their own living faces. The
temperature dropped with every step they took. As
Harry shivered and drew his robes tightly around
him, he heard what sounded like a thousand
fingernails scraping an enormous blackboard.
“Is that supposed to be music?” Ron whispered. They
turned a corner and saw Nearly Headless Nick
standing at a doorway hung with black velvet drapes.
“My dear friends,” he said mournfully. “Welcome,
welcome ... so pleased you could come. ...”
He swept off his plumed hat and bowed them inside.
It was an incredible sight. The dungeon was full of
hundreds of pearly-white, translucent people, mostly
drifting around a crowded dance floor, waltzing to the
dreadful, quavering sound of thirty musical saws,
played by an orchestra on a raised, black-draped
platform. A chandelier overhead blazed midnight-blue

with a thousand more black candles. Their breath
rose in a mist before them; it was like stepping into a
freezer.
“Shall we have a look around?” Harry suggested,
wanting to warm up his feet.
“Careful not to walk through anyone,” said Ron
nervously, and they set off around the edge of the
dance floor. They passed a group of gloomy nuns, a
ragged man wearing chains, and the Fat Friar, a
cheerful Hufflepuff ghost, who was talking to a knight
with an arrow sticking out of his forehead. Harry
wasn’t surprised to see that the Bloody Baron, a
gaunt, staring Slytherin ghost covered in silver
bloodstains, was being given a wide berth by the
other ghosts.
“Oh, no,” said Hermione, stopping abruptly. “Turn
back, turn back, I don’t want to talk to Moaning
Myrtle — ”
“Who?” said Harry as they backtracked quickly.
“She haunts one of the toilets in the girls’ bathroom
on the first floor,” said Hermione.
“She haunts a toilet ?”
“Yes. It’s been out-of-order all year because she keeps
having tantrums and flooding the place. I never went
in there anyway if I could avoid it; it’s awful trying to
have a pee with her wailing at you — ”
“Look, food!” said Ron.
On the other side of the dungeon was a long table,
also covered in black velvet. They approached it
eagerly but next moment had stopped in their tracks,

horrified. The smell was quite disgusting. Large,
rotten fish were laid on handsome silver platters;
cakes, burned charcoal-black, were heaped on
salvers; there was a great maggoty haggis, a slab of
cheese covered in furry green mold and, in pride of
place, an enormous gray cake in the shape of a
tombstone, with tar-like icing forming the words,
SIR NICHOLAS DE MIMSY-PORPINGTON
DIED   ST OCTOBER,
Harry watched, amazed, as a portly ghost approached
the table, crouched low, and walked through it, his
mouth held wide so that it passed through one of the
stinking salmon.
“Can you taste it if you walk through it?” Harry asked
him.
“Almost,” said the ghost sadly, and he drifted away.
“I expect they’ve let it rot to give it a stronger flavor,”
said Hermione knowledgeably, pinching her nose and
leaning closer to look at the putrid haggis.
“Can we move? I feel sick,” said Ron.
They had barely turned around, however, when a
little man swooped suddenly from under the table and
came to a halt in midair before them.
“Hello, Peeves,” said Harry cautiously.
Unlike the ghosts around them, Peeves the Poltergeist
was the very reverse of pale and transparent. He was
wearing a bright orange party hat, a revolving bow tie,
and a broad grin on his wide, wicked face.
“Nibbles?” he said sweetly, offering them a bowl of
peanuts covered in fungus.
“No thanks,” said Hermione.
“Heard you talking about poor Myrtle,” said Peeves,
his eyes dancing. “Rude you was about poor Myrtle.”
He took a deep breath and bellowed, “OY! MYRTLE!”
“Oh, no, Peeves, don’t tell her what I said, she’ll be
really upset,” Hermione whispered frantically. “I didn’t
mean it, I don’t mind her — er, hello, Myrtle.”
The squat ghost of a girl had glided over. She had the
glummest face Harry had ever seen, half-hidden
behind lank hair and thick, pearly spectacles.
“What?” she said sulkily.
“How are you, Myrtle?” said Hermione in a falsely
bright voice. “It’s nice to see you out of the toilet.”
Myrtle sniffed.
“Miss Granger was just talking about you — ” said
Peeves slyly in Myrtle’s ear.
“Just saying — saying — how nice you look tonight,”
said Hermione, glaring at Peeves.
Myrtle eyed Hermione suspiciously.
“You’re making fun of me,” she said, silver tears
welling rapidly in her small, see-through eyes.
“No — honestly — didn’t I just say how nice Myrtle’s
looking?” said Hermione, nudging Harry and Ron
painfully in the ribs.
“Oh, yeah — ” “She did — ”
“Don’t lie to me,” Myrtle gasped, tears now flooding
down her face, while Peeves chuckled happily over her
shoulder. “D’you think I don’t know what people call
me behind my back? Fat Myrtle! Ugly Myrtle!
Miserable, moaning, moping Myrtle!”
“You’ve forgotten pimply,” Peeves hissed in her ear.
Moaning Myrtle burst into anguished sobs and fled
from the dungeon. Peeves shot after her, pelting her
with moldy peanuts, yelling, “Pimply\ Pimplyl”
“Oh, dear,” said Hermione sadly.
Nearly Headless Nick now drifted toward them
through the crowd.
“Enjoying yourselves?”
“Oh, yes,” they lied.
“Not a bad turnout,” said Nearly Headless Nick
proudly. “The Wailing Widow came all the way up
from Kent. ... It’s nearly time for my speech, I’d better
go and warn the orchestra. ...”
The orchestra, however, stopped playing at that very
moment. They, and everyone else in the dungeon, fell
silent, looking around in excitement, as a hunting
horn sounded.
“Oh, here we go,” said Nearly Headless Nick bitterly.
Through the dungeon wall burst a dozen ghost
horses, each ridden by a headless horseman. The

assembly clapped wildly; Harry started to clap, too,
but stopped quickly at the sight of Nick’s face.
The horses galloped into the middle of the dance floor
and halted, rearing and plunging. At the front of the
pack was a large ghost who held his bearded head
under his arm, from which position he was blowing
the horn. The ghost leapt down, lifted his head high
in the air so he could see over the crowd (everyone
laughed), and strode over to Nearly Headless Nick,
squashing his head back onto his neck.
“Nick!” he roared. “How are you? Head still hanging in
there?”
He gave a hearty guffaw and clapped Nearly Headless
Nick on the shoulder.
“Welcome, Patrick,” said Nick stiffly.
“Live ’uns!” said Sir Patrick, spotting Harry, Ron, and
Hermione and giving a huge, fake jump of
astonishment, so that his head fell off again (the
crowd howled with laughter).
“Very amusing,” said Nearly Headless Nick darkly.
“Don’t mind Nick!” shouted Sir Patrick’s head from
the floor. “Still upset we won’t let him join the Hunt!
But I mean to say — look at the fellow — ”
“I think,” said Harry hurriedly, at a meaningful look
from Nick, “Nick’s very — frightening and — er — ”
“Ha!” yelled Sir Patrick’s head. “Bet he asked you to
say that!”
“If I could have everyone’s attention, it’s time for my
speech!” said Nearly Headless Nick loudly, striding

toward the podium and climbing into an icy blue
spotlight.
“My late lamented lords, ladies, and gentlemen, it is
my great sorrow ...”
But nobody heard much more. Sir Patrick and the
rest of the Headless Hunt had just started a game of
Head Hockey and the crowd were turning to watch.
Nearly Headless Nick tried vainly to recapture his
audience, but gave up as Sir Patrick’s head went
sailing past him to loud cheers.
Harry was very cold by now, not to mention hungry.
“I can’t stand much more of this,” Ron muttered, his
teeth chattering, as the orchestra ground back into
action and the ghosts swept back onto the dance
floor.
“Let’s go,” Harry agreed.
They backed toward the door, nodding and beaming
at anyone who looked at them, and a minute later
were hurrying back up the passageway full of black
candles.
“Pudding might not be finished yet,” said Ron
hopefully, leading the way toward the steps to the
entrance hall.
And then Harry heard it.
"... rip ... tear ... kill ...”
It was the same voice, the same cold, murderous
voice he had heard in Lockhart’s office.
He stumbled to a halt, clutching at the stone wall,
listening with all his might, looking around, squinting
up and down the dimly lit passageway.
“Harry, what’re you — ?”
“It’s that voice again — shut up a minute — ”
soo hungry ... for so long ...”
“Listen!” said Harry urgently, and Ron and Hermione
froze, watching him.
“... kill ... time to kill ...”
The voice was growing fainter. Harry was sure it was
moving away — moving upward. A mixture of fear and
excitement gripped him as he stared at the dark
ceiling; how could it be moving upward? Was it a
phantom, to whom stone ceilings didn’t matter?
“This way,” he shouted, and he began to run, up the
stairs, into the entrance hall. It was no good hoping to
hear anything here, the babble of talk from the
Halloween feast was echoing out of the Great Hall.
Harry sprinted up the marble staircase to the first
floor, Ron and Hermione clattering behind him.
“Harry, what’re we — ”
“SHH!”
Harry strained his ears. Distantly, from the floor
above, and growing fainter still, he heard the voice:
“...I smell blood. ...I SMELL BLOOD\”
His stomach lurched —
“It’s going to kill someone!” he shouted, and ignoring
Ron’s and Hermione’s bewildered faces, he ran up the
next flight of steps three at a time, trying to listen
over his own pounding footsteps —
Harry hurtled around the whole of the second floor,
Ron and Hermione panting behind him, not stopping
until they turned a corner into the last, deserted
passage.
“Harry, what was that all about?” said Ron, wiping
sweat off his face. “I couldn’t hear anything. ...”
But Hermione gave a sudden gasp, pointing down the
corridor.
“Loo/c!”
Something was shining on the wall ahead. They
approached slowly, squinting through the darkness.
Foot-high words had been daubed on the wall
between two windows, shimmering in the light cast by
the flaming torches.
THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS HAS BEEN OPENED.
ENEMIES OF THE HEIR, BEWARE.
“What’s that thing — hanging underneath?” said Ron,
a slight quiver in his voice.
As they edged nearer, Harry almost slipped — there
was a large puddle of water on the floor; Ron and
Hermione grabbed him, and they inched toward the
message, eyes fixed on a dark shadow beneath it. All
three of them realized what it was at once, and leapt
backward with a splash.
Mrs. Norris, the caretaker’s cat, was hanging by her
tail from the torch bracket. She was stiff as a board,
her eyes wide and staring.
For a few seconds, they didn’t move. Then Ron said,
“Let’s get out of here.”
“Shouldn’t we try and help — ” Harry began
awkwardly.
“Trust me,” said Ron. “We don’t want to be found
here.”
But it was too late. A rumble, as though of distant
thunder, told them that the feast had just ended.
From either end of the corridor where they stood
came the sound of hundreds of feet climbing the
stairs, and the loud, happy talk of well-fed people;
next moment, students were crashing into the
passage from both ends.
The chatter, the bustle, the noise died suddenly as
the people in front spotted the hanging cat. Harry,
Ron, and Hermione stood alone, in the middle of the
corridor, as silence fell among the mass of students
pressing forward to see the grisly sight.
Then someone shouted through the quiet.
“Enemies of the Heir, beware! You’ll be next,
Mudbloods!”
It was Draco Malfoy. He had pushed to the front of
the crowd, his cold eyes alive, his usually bloodless
face flushed, as he grinned at the sight of the
hanging, immobile cat.

THE WRITING ON THE WALL
“What’s going on here? What’s going on?”
Attracted no doubt by Malfoy’s shout, Argus Filch
came shouldering his way through the crowd. Then
he saw Mrs. Norris and fell back, clutching his face in
horror.
“My cat! My cat! What’s happened to Mrs. Norris?” he
shrieked.
And his popping eyes fell on Harry.
“You!” he screeched. “You! You’ve murdered my cat!
You’ve killed her! I’ll kill you! I’ll — ”
“Argus'.”
Dumbledore had arrived on the scene, followed by a
number of other teachers. In seconds, he had swept
past Harry, Ron, and Hermione and detached Mrs.
Norris from the torch bracket.   “Come with me, Argus,” he said to Filch. “You, too,
Mr. Potter, Mr. Weasley, Miss Granger.”
Lockhart stepped forward eagerly.
“My office is nearest, Headmaster — just upstairs —
please feel free — ”
“Thank you, Gilderoy,” said Dumbledore.
The silent crowd parted to let them pass. Lockhart,
looking excited and important, hurried after
Dumbledore; so did Professors McGonagall and
Snape.
As they entered Lockhart’s darkened office there was
a flurry of movement across the walls; Harry saw
several of the Lockharts in the pictures dodging out of
sight, their hair in rollers. The real Lockhart lit the
candles on his desk and stood back. Dumbledore laid
Mrs. Norris on the polished surface and began to
examine her. Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged
tense looks and sank into chairs outside the pool of
candlelight, watching.
The tip of Dumbledore ’s long, crooked nose was
barely an inch from Mrs. Norris’s fur. He was looking
at her closely through his half-moon spectacles, his
long fingers gently prodding and poking. Professor
McGonagall was bent almost as close, her eyes
narrowed. Snape loomed behind them, half in
shadow, wearing a most peculiar expression: It was
as though he was trying hard not to smile. And
Lockhart was hovering around all of them, making
suggestions.
“It was definitely a curse that killed her — probably
the Trans-mogrifian Torture — I’ve seen it used many
times, so unlucky I wasn’t there, I know the very
countercurse that would have saved her. ...”
Lockhart’s comments were punctuated by Filch ’s dry,
racking sobs. He was slumped in a chair by the desk,
unable to look at Mrs. Norris, his face in his hands.
Much as he detested Filch, Harry couldn’t help feeling
a bit sorry for him, though not nearly as sorry as he
felt for himself. If Dumbledore believed Filch, he
would be expelled for sure.
Dumbledore was now muttering strange words under
his breath and tapping Mrs. Norris with his wand but
nothing happened: She continued to look as though
she had been recently stuffed.
"... I remember something very similar happening in
Ouagadougou,” said Lockhart, “a series of attacks,
the full story’s in my autobiography, I was able to
provide the townsfolk with various amulets, which
cleared the matter up at once. ...”
The photographs of Lockhart on the walls were all
nodding in agreement as he talked. One of them had
forgotten to remove his hair net.
At last Dumbledore straightened up.
“She’s not dead, Argus,” he said softly.
Lockhart stopped abruptly in the middle of counting
the number of murders he had prevented.
“Not dead?” choked Filch, looking through his fingers
at Mrs. Norris. “But why’s she all — all stiff and
frozen?”
“She has been Petrified,” said Dumbledore (“Ah! I
thought so!” said Lockhart). “But how, I cannot say. “Ask him\” shrieked Filch, turning his blotched and
tearstained face to Harry.
“No second year could have done this,” said
Dumbledore firmly. “It would take Dark Magic of the
most advanced — ”
“He did it, he did it!” Filch spat, his pouchy face
purpling. “You saw what he wrote on the wall! He
found — in my office — he knows I’m a — I’m a — ”
Filch ’s face worked horribly. “He knows I’m a Squib!”
he finished.
“I never touched Mrs. Norris!” Harry said loudly,
uncomfortably aware of everyone looking at him,
including all the Lockharts on the walls. “And I don’t
even know what a Squib is.”
“Rubbish!” snarled Filch. “He saw my Kwikspell
letter!”
“If I might speak, Headmaster,” said Snape from the
shadows, and Harry’s sense of foreboding increased;
he was sure nothing Snape had to say was going to
do him any good.
“Potter and his friends may have simply been in the
wrong place at the wrong time,” he said, a slight sneer
curling his mouth as though he doubted it. “But we
do have a set of suspicious circumstances here. Why
was he in the upstairs corridor at all? Why wasn’t he
at the Halloween feast?”
Harry, Ron and Hermione all launched into an
explanation about the deathday party. "... there were
hundreds of ghosts, they’ll tell you we were there — ”
“But why not join the feast afterward?” said Snape,
his black eyes glittering in the candlelight. “Why go
up to that corridor?”
Ron and Hermione looked at Harry.
“Because — because — ” Harry said, his heart
thumping very fast; something told him it would
sound very far-fetched if he told them he had been led
there by a bodiless voice no one but he could hear,
“because we were tired and wanted to go to bed,” he
said.
“Without any supper?” said Snape, a triumphant
smile flickering across his gaunt face. “I didn’t think
ghosts provided food fit for living people at their
parties.”
“We weren’t hungry,” said Ron loudly as his stomach
gave a huge rumble.
Snape’s nasty smile widened.
“I suggest, Headmaster, that Potter is not being
entirely truthful,” he said. “It might be a good idea if
he were deprived of certain privileges until he is ready
to tell us the whole story. I personally feel he should
be taken off the Gryffindor Quidditch team until he is
ready to be honest.”
“Really, Severus,” said Professor McGonagall sharply,
“I see no reason to stop the boy playing Quidditch.
This cat wasn’t hit over the head with a broomstick.
There is no evidence at all that Potter has done
anything wrong.”

Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look. His
twinkling light-blue gaze made Harry feel as though
he were being X-rayed.
“Innocent until proven guilty, Severus,” he said
firmly.
Snape looked furious. So did Filch.
“My cat has been Petrified!” he shrieked, his eyes
popping. “I want to see some punishmenti”
“We will be able to cure her, Argus,” said Dumbledore
patiently. “Professer Sprout recently managed to
procure some Mandrakes. As soon as they have
reached their full size, I will have a potion made that
will revive Mrs. Norris.”
“I’ll make it,” Lockhart butted in. “I must have done it
a hundred times. I could whip up a Mandrake
Restorative Draught in my sleep — ”
“Excuse me,” said Snape icily. “But I believe I am the
Potions master at this school.”
There was a very awkward pause.
“You may go,” Dumbledore said to Harry, Ron, and
Hermione.
They went, as quickly as they could without actually
running. When they were a floor up from Lockhart’s
office, they turned into an empty classroom and
closed the door quietly behind them. Harry squinted
at his friends’ darkened faces.
“D’you think I should have told them about that voice
I heard?”
“No,” said Ron, without hesitation. “Hearing voices no
one else can hear isn’t a good sign, even in the
wizarding world.”
Something in Ron’s voice made Harry ask, “You do
believe me, don’t you?”
“ ’Course I do,” said Ron quickly. “But — you must
admit it’s weird. ...”
“I know it’s weird,” said Harry. “The whole thing’s
weird. What was that writing on the wall about? The
Chamber Has Been Opened’. ... What’s that supposed
to mean?”
“You know, it rings a sort of bell,” said Ron slowly. “I
think someone told me a story about a secret
chamber at Hogwarts once ... might’ve been Bill. ...”
“And what on earth’s a Squib?” said Harry.
To his surprise, Ron stifled a snigger.
“Well — it’s not funny really — but as it’s Filch,” he
said. “A Squib is someone who was born into a
wizarding family but hasn’t got any magic powers.
Kind of the opposite of Muggle-born wizards, but
Squibs are quite unusual. If Filch ’s trying to learn
magic from a Kwikspell course, I reckon he must be a
Squib. It would explain a lot. Like why he hates
students so much.” Ron gave a satisfied smile. “He’s
bitter.”
A clock chimed somewhere.
“Midnight,” said Harry. “We’d better get to bed before
Snape comes along and tries to frame us for
something else.”
For a few days, the school could talk of little else but
the attack on Mrs. Norris. Filch kept it fresh in
everyone’s minds by pacing the spot where she had
been attacked, as though he thought the attacker
might come back. Harry had seen him scrubbing the
message on the wall with Mrs. Skower’s All-Purpose
Magical Mess Remover, but to no effect; the words
still gleamed as brightly as ever on the stone. When
Filch wasn’t guarding the scene of the crime, he was
skulking red-eyed through the corridors, lunging out
at unsuspecting students and trying to put them in
detention for things like “breathing loudly” and
“looking happy.”
Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs.
Norris’s fate. According to Ron, she was a great cat
lover.
“But you haven’t really got to know Mrs. Norris,” Ron
told her bracingly. “Honestly, we’re much better off
without her.” Ginny ’s lip trembled. “Stuff like this
doesn’t often happen at Hogwarts,” Ron assured her.
“They’ll catch the maniac who did it and have him out
of here in no time. I just hope he’s got time to Petrify
Filch before he’s expelled. I’m only joking — ” Ron
added hastily as Ginny blanched.
The attack had also had an effect on Hermione. It was
quite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of time
reading, but she was now doing almost nothing else.
Nor could Harry and Ron get much response from her
when they asked what she was up to, and not until
the following Wednesday did they find out.
Harry had been held back in Potions, where Snape
had made him stay behind to scrape tubeworms off
the desks. After a hurried lunch, he went upstairs to
meet Ron in the library, and saw Justin Finch-
Fletchley, the Hufflepuff boy from Herbology, coming
toward him. Harry had just opened his mouth to say
hello when Justin caught sight of him, turned
abruptly, and sped off in the opposite direction.
Harry found Ron at the back of the library, measuring
his History of Magic homework. Professor Binns had
asked for a three-foot-long composition on “The
Medieval Assembly of European Wizards.”
“I don’t believe it, I’m still eight inches short. ...” said
Ron furiously, letting go of his parchment, which
sprang back into a roll. “And Hermione’s done four
feet seven inches and her writing’s tiny.”
“Where is she?” asked Harry, grabbing the tape
measure and unrolling his own homework.
“Somewhere over there,” said Ron, pointing along the
shelves. “Looking for another book. I think she’s
trying to read the whole library before Christmas.”
Harry told Ron about Justin Finch-Fletchley running
away from him.
“Dunno why you care. I thought he was a bit of an
idiot,” said Ron, scribbling away, making his writing
as large as possible. “All that junk about Lockhart
being so great — ”
Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves.
She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to talk
to them.
“All the copies of Hogwarts, A History have been taken
out,” she said, sitting down next to Harry and Ron.
“And there’s a two-week waiting list. I wish I hadn’t

left my copy at home, but I couldn’t fit it in my trunk
with all the Lockhart books.” “Why do you want it?” said Harry.
“The same reason everyone else wants it,” said
Hermione, “to read up on the legend of the Chamber
of Secrets.”
“What’s that?” said Harry quickly.
“That’s just it. I can’t remember,” said Hermione,
biting her lip. “And I can’t find the story anywhere
else — ”
“Hermione, let me read your composition,” said Ron
desperately, checking his watch.
“No, I won’t,” said Hermione, suddenly severe. “You’ve
had ten days to finish it — ”
“I only need another two inches, come on — ”
The bell rang. Ron and Hermione led the way to
History of Magic, bickering.
History of Magic was the dullest subject on their
schedule. Professor Binns, who taught it, was their
only ghost teacher, and the most exciting thing that
ever happened in his classes was his entering the
room through the blackboard. Ancient and shriveled,
many people said he hadn’t noticed he was dead. He
had simply got up to teach one day and left his body
behind him in an armchair in front of the staffroom
fire; his routine had not varied in the slightest since.
Today was as boring as ever. Professor Binns opened
his notes and began to read in a flat drone like an old
vacuum cleaner until nearly everyone in the class was

in a deep stupor, occasionally coming to long enough
to copy down a name or date, then falling asleep
again. He had been speaking for half an hour when
something happened that had never happened before.
Hermione put up her hand.
Professor Binns, glancing up in the middle of a deadly
dull lecture on the International Warlock Convention
of , looked amazed.
“Miss — er — ?”
“Granger, Professor. I was wondering if you could tell
us anything about the Chamber of Secrets,” said
Hermione in a clear voice.
Dean Thomas, who had been sitting with his mouth
hanging open, gazing out of the window, jerked out of
his trance; Lavender Brown’s head came up off her
arms and Neville Longbottom’s elbow slipped off his
desk.
Professor Binns blinked.
“My subject is History of Magic,” he said in his dry,
wheezy voice. “I deal with, facts, Miss Granger, not
myths and legends.” He cleared his throat with a
small noise like chalk snapping and continued, “In
September of that year, a subcommittee of Sardinian
sorcerers — ”
He stuttered to a halt. Hermione’s hand was waving
in the air again.
“Miss Grant?”
“Please, sir, don’t legends always have a basis in
fact?”
Professor Binns was looking at her in such
amazement, Harry was sure no student had ever
interrupted him before, alive or dead.
“Well,” said Professor Binns slowly, “yes, one could
argue that, I suppose.” He peered at Hermione as
though he had never seen a student properly before.
“However, the legend of which you speak is such a
very sensational, even ludicrous tale — ”
But the whole class was now hanging on Professor
Binns ’s every word. He looked dimly at them all, every
face turned to his. Harry could tell he was completely
thrown by such an unusual show of interest.
“Oh, very well,” he said slowly. “Let me see ... the
Chamber of Secrets . . .
“You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was founded
over a thousand years ago — the precise date is
uncertain — by the four greatest witches and wizards
of the age. The four school Houses are named after
them: Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, Rowena
Ravenclaw, and Salazar Slytherin. They built this
castle together, far from prying Muggle eyes, for it was
an age when magic was feared by common people,
and witches and wizards suffered much persecution.”
He paused, gazed blearily around the room, and
continued.
“For a few years, the founders worked in harmony
together, seeking out youngsters who showed signs of
magic and bringing them to the castle to be educated.
But then disagreements sprang up between them. A
rift began to grow between Slytherin and the others.
Slytherin wished to be more selective about the
students admitted to Hogwarts. He believed that
magical learning should be kept within all-magic

families. He disliked taking students of Muggle
parentage, believing them to be untrustworthy. After
a while, there was a serious argument on the subject
between Slytherin and Gryffindor, and Slytherin left
the school.”
Professor Binns paused again, pursing his lips,
looking like a wrinkled old tortoise.
“Reliable historical sources tell us this much,” he
said. “But these honest facts have been obscured by
the fanciful legend of the Chamber of Secrets. The
story goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamber
in the castle, of which the other founders knew
nothing.
“Slytherin, according to the legend, sealed the
Chamber of Secrets so that none would be able to
open it until his own true heir arrived at the school.
The heir alone would be able to unseal the Chamber
of Secrets, unleash the horror within, and use it to
purge the school of all who were unworthy to study
magic.”
There was silence as he finished telling the story, but
it wasn’t the usual, sleepy silence that filled Professor
Binns ’s classes. There was unease in the air as
everyone continued to watch him, hoping for more.
Professor Binns looked faintly annoyed.
“The whole thing is arrant nonsense, of course,” he
said. “Naturally, the school has been searched for
evidence of such a chamber, many times, by the most
learned witches and wizards. It does not exist. A tale
told to frighten the gullible.”
Hermione’s hand was back in the air.
“Sir — what exactly do you mean by the ‘horror
within’ the Chamber?”
“That is believed to be some sort of monster, which
the Heir of Slytherin alone can control,” said Professor
Binns in his dry, reedy voice.
The class exchanged nervous looks.
“I tell you, the thing does not exist,” said Professor
Binns, shuffling his notes. “There is no Chamber and
no monster.”
“But, sir,” said Seamus Finnigan, “if the Chamber can
only be opened by Slytherin’s true heir, no one else
would be able to find it, would they?”
“Nonsense, O’Flaherty,” said Professor Binns in an
aggravated tone. “If a long succession of Hogwarts
headmasters and headmistresses haven’t found the
thing — ”
“But, Professor,” piped up Parvati Patil, “you’d
probably have to use Dark Magic to open it — ”
“Just because a wizard doesn’t use Dark Magic
doesn’t mean he can’t, Miss Pennyfeather,” snapped
Professor Binns. “I repeat, if the likes of Dumbledore “But maybe you’ve got to be related to Slytherin, so
Dumbledore couldn’t — ” began Dean Thomas, but
Professor Binns had had enough.
“That will do,” he said sharply. “It is a myth! It does
not exist! There is not a shred of evidence that
Slytherin ever built so much as a secret broom
cupboard! I regret telling you such a foolish story! We
will return, if you please, to history, to solid,
believable, verifiable facti” And within five minutes, the class had sunk back into
its usual torpor.
“I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted old
loony,” Ron told Harry and Hermione as they fought
their way through the teeming corridors at the end of
the lesson to drop off their bags before dinner. “But I
never knew he started all this pure-blood stuff. I
wouldn’t be in his House if you paid me. Honestly, if
the Sorting Hat had tried to put me in Slytherin, I’d’ve
got the train straight back home. ...”
Hermione nodded fervently, but Harry didn’t say
anything. His stomach had just dropped
unpleasantly.
Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that the
Sorting Hat had seriously considered putting him in
Slytherin. He could remember, as though it were
yesterday, the small voice that had spoken in his ear
when he’d placed the hat on his head a year before:
You could be great, you know, it’s all here in your
head, and Slytherin would help you on the way to
greatness, no doubt about that. . . .
But Harry, who had already heard of Slytherin
House’s reputation for turning out Dark wizards, had
thought desperately, Not Slytherin ! and the hat had
said, Oh, well, if you’re sure ... better be Gryffindor. ...
As they were shunted along in the throng, Colin
Creevey went past.
“Hiya, Harry!”
“Hullo, Colin,” said Harry automatically.

“Harry — Harry — a boy in my class has been saying
you’re — ” But Colin was so small he couldn’t fight against the
tide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall; they
heard him squeak, “See you, Harry!” and he was
gone.
“What’s a boy in his class saying about you?”
Hermione wondered.
“That I’m Slytherin’s heir, I expect,” said Harry, his
stomach dropping another inch or so as he suddenly
remembered the way Justin Finch-Fletchley had run
away from him at lunchtime.
“People here’ll believe anything,” said Ron in disgust.
The crowd thinned and they were able to climb the
next staircase without difficulty.
“D’you really think there’s a Chamber of Secrets?”
Ron asked Hermione.
“I don’t know,” she said, frowning. “Dumbledore
couldn’t cure Mrs. Norris, and that makes me think
that whatever attacked her might not be — well —
human.”
As she spoke, they turned a corner and found
themselves at the end of the very corridor where the
attack had happened. They stopped and looked. The
scene was just as it had been that night, except that
there was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket,
and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing the
message “The Chamber of Secrets Has Been Opened.”
“That’s where Filch has been keeping guard,” Ron
muttered.

They looked at each other. The corridor was deserted. “Can’t hurt to have a poke around,” said Harry,
dropping his bag and getting to his hands and knees
so that he could crawl along, searching for clues.
“Scorch marks!” he said. “Here — and here — ”
“Come and look at this!” said Hermione. “This is
funny. ...”
Harry got up and crossed to the window next to the
message on the wall. Hermione was pointing at the
topmost pane, where around twenty spiders were
scuttling, apparently fighting to get through a small
crack. A long, silvery thread was dangling like a rope,
as though they had all climbed it in their hurry to get
outside.
“Have you ever seen spiders act like that?” said
Hermione wonderingly.
“No,” said Harry, “have you, Ron? Ron?”
He looked over his shoulder. Ron was standing well
back and seemed to be fighting the impulse to run.
“What’s up?” said Harry.
“I — don’t — like — spiders,” said Ron tensely.
“I never knew that,” said Hermione, looking at Ron in
surprise. “You’ve used spiders in Potions loads of
times. ...”
“I don’t mind them dead,” said Ron, who was carefully
looking anywhere but at the window. “I just don’t like
the way they move. ...”

Hermione giggled. “It’s not funny,” said Ron, fiercely. “If you must know,
when I was three, Fred turned my — my teddy bear
into a great big filthy spider because I broke his toy
broomstick. ... You wouldn’t like them either if you’d
been holding your bear and suddenly it had too many
legs and ...”
He broke off, shuddering. Hermione was obviously
still trying not to laugh. Feeling they had better get off
the subject, Harry said, “Remember all that water on
the floor? Where did that come from? Someone’s
mopped it up.”
“It was about here,” said Ron, recovering himself to
walk a few paces past Filch’s chair and pointing.
“Level with this door.”
He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenly
withdrew his hand as though he’d been burned.
“What’s the matter?” said Harry.
“Can’t go in there,” said Ron gruffly. “That’s a girls’
toilet.”
“Oh, Ron, there won’t be anyone in there,” said
Hermione, standing up and coming over. “That’s
Moaning Myrtle’s place. Come on, let’s have a look.”
And ignoring the large OUT OF ORDER sign, she
opened the door.
It was the gloomiest, most depressing bathroom Harry
had ever set foot in. Under a large, cracked, and
spotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks. The floor
was damp and reflected the dull light given off by the
stubs of a few candles, burning low in their holders;

the wooden doors to the stalls were flaking and
scratched and one of them was dangling off its
hinges.
Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set off
toward the end stall. When she reached it she said,
“Hello, Myrtle, how are you?”
Harry and Ron went to look. Moaning Myrtle was
floating above the tank of the toilet, picking a spot on
her chin.
“This is a girls’ bathroom,” she said, eyeing Ron and
Harry suspiciously. “They’re not girls.”
“No,” Hermione agreed. “I just wanted to show them
how — er — nice it is in here.”
She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and the
damp floor.
“Ask her if she saw anything,” Harry mouthed at
Hermione.
“What are you whispering?” said Myrtle, staring at
him.
“Nothing,” said Harry quickly. “We wanted to ask — ”
“I wish people would stop talking behind my back!”
said Myrtle, in a voice choked with tears. “I do have
feelings, you know, even if I am dead — ”
“Myrtle, no one wants to upset you,” said Hermione.
“Harry only — ”
“No one wants to upset me! That’s a good one!”
howled Myrtle. “My life was nothing but misery at this
place and now people come along ruining my death!”

“We wanted to ask you if you’ve seen anything funny
lately,” said Hermione quickly. “Because a cat was
attacked right outside your front door on Halloween.”
“Did you see anyone near here that night?” said
Harry.
“I wasn’t paying attention,” said Myrtle dramatically.
“Peeves upset me so much I came in here and tried to
kill myself. Then, of course, I remembered that I’m —
that I’m — ”
“Already dead,” said Ron helpfully.
Myrtle gave a tragic sob, rose up in the air, turned
over, and dived headfirst into the toilet, splashing
water all over them and vanishing from sight,
although from the direction of her muffled sobs, she
had come to rest somewhere in the U-bend.
Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open, but
Hermione shrugged wearily and said, “Honestly, that
was almost cheerful for Myrtle. ... Come on, let’s go.”
Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtle’s gurgling
sobs when a loud voice made all three of them jump.
“RON!”
Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of the
stairs, prefect badge agleam, an expression of
complete shock on his face.
“That’s a girls’ bathroom!” he gasped. “What were you
— ?”
“Just having a look around,” Ron shrugged. “Clues,
you know — ”
Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harry
forcefully of Mrs. Weasley. “Get — away — from — there — ” Percy said, striding
toward them and starting to bustle them along,
flapping his arms. “Don’t you care what this looks
like? Coming back here while everyone’s at dinner — ”
“Why shouldn’t we be here?” said Ron hotly, stopping
short and glaring at Percy. “Listen, we never laid a
finger on that cat!”
“That’s what I told Ginny,” said Percy fiercely, “but
she still seems to think you’re going to be expelled,
I’ve never seen her so upset, crying her eyes out, you
might think of her, all the first years are thoroughly
overexcited by this business — ”
“ You don’t care about Ginny,” said Ron, whose ears
were now reddening. “You’re just worried I’m going to
mess up your chances of being Head Boy — ”
“Five points from Gryffindor!” Percy said tersely,
fingering his prefect badge. “And I hope it teaches you
a lesson! No more detective work, or I’ll write to
Mum!”
And he strode off, the back of his neck as red as
Ron’s ears. Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose seats as far as
possible from Percy in the common room that night.
Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blotting
his Charms homework. When he reached absently for
his wand to remove the smudges, it ignited the
parchment. Fuming almost as much as his
homework, Ron slammed The Standard Book of

Spells, Grade  shut. To Harry’s surprise, Hermione
followed suit.
“Who can it be, though?” she said in a quiet voice, as
though continuing a conversation they had just been
having. “Who’d want to frighten all the Squibs and
Muggle-borns out of Hogwarts?”
“Let’s think,” said Ron in mock puzzlement. “Who do
we know who thinks Muggle-borns are scum?”
He looked at Hermione. Hermione looked back,
unconvinced.
“If you’re talking about Malfoy — ”
“Of course I am!” said Ron. “You heard him — ‘You’ll
be next, MudbloodsV — come on, you’ve only got to
look at his foul rat face to know it’s him — ”
“Malfoy, the Heir of Slytherin?” said Hermione
skeptically.
“Look at his family,” said Harry, closing his books,
too. “The whole lot of them have been in Slytherin;
he’s always boasting about it. They could easily be
Slytherin’s descendants. His father’s definitely evil
enough.”
“They could’ve had the key to the Chamber of Secrets
for centuries!” said Ron. “Handing it down, father to
son. ...”
“Well,” said Hermione cautiously, “I suppose it’s
possible. ...”
“But how do we prove it?” said Harry darkly.
“There might be a way,” said Hermione slowly,
dropping her voice still further with a quick glance
across the room at Percy. “Of course, it would be
difficult. And dangerous, very dangerous. We’d be
breaking about fifty school rules, I expect — ”
“If, in a month or so, you feel like explaining, you will
let us know, won’t you?” said Ron irritably.
“All right,” said Hermione coldly. “What we’d need to
do is to get inside the Slytherin common room and
ask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing it’s
us.” “But that’s impossible,” Harry said as Ron laughed.
“No, it’s not,” said Hermione. “All we’d need would be
some Polyjuice Potion.”
“What’s that?” said Ron and Harry together.
“Snape mentioned it in class a few weeks ago — ”
“D’you think we’ve got nothing better to do in Potions
than listen to Snape?” muttered Ron.
“It transforms you into somebody else. Think about it!
We could change into three of the Slytherins. No one
would know it was us. Malfoy would probably tell us
anything. He’s probably boasting about it in the
Slytherin common room right now, if only we could
hear him.”
“This Polyjuice stuff sounds a bit dodgy to me,” said
Ron, frowning. “What if we were stuck looking like
three of the Slytherins forever?”
“It wears off after a while,” said Hermione, waving her
hand impatiently. “But getting hold of the recipe will

be very difficult. Snape said it was in a book called
Moste Potente Potions and it’s bound to be in the
Restricted Section of the library.”
There was only one way to get out a book from the
Restricted Section: You needed a signed note of
permission from a teacher.
“Hard to see why we’d want the book, really,” said
Ron, “if we weren’t going to try and make one of the
potions.”
“I think,” said Hermione, “that if we made it sound as
though we were just interested in the theory, we
might stand a chance. ...”
“Oh, come on, no teacher’s going to fall for that,” said
Ron. “They’d have to be really thick. ...”

THE ROGUE BLUDGER
Since the disastrous episode of the pixies, Professor
Lockhart had not brought live creatures to class.
Instead, he read passages from his books to them,
and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramatic
bits. He usually picked Harry to help him with these
reconstructions; so far, Harry had been forced to play
a simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart had
cured of a Babbling Curse, a yeti with a head cold,
and a vampire who had been unable to eat anything
except lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with him.
Harry was hauled to the front of the class during their
very next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson, this
time acting a werewolf. If he hadn’t had a very good
reason for keeping Lockhart in a good mood, he would
have refused to do it.
“Nice loud howl, Harry — exactly — and then, if you’ll
believe it, I pounced — like this — slammed him to
the floor — thus — with one hand, I managed to hold
him down — with my other, I put my wand to his
throat — I then screwed up my remaining strength
  Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets- J.K. Rowling and performed the immensely complex Homorphus
Charm — he let out a piteous moan — go on, Harry —
higher than that — good — the fur vanished — the
fangs shrank — and he turned back into a man.
Simple, yet effective — and another village will
remember me forever as the hero who delivered them
from the monthly terror of werewolf attacks.”
The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet.
“Homework — compose a poem about my defeat of
the Wagga Wagga Werewolf! Signed copies of Magical
Me to the author of the best one!”
The class began to leave. Harry returned to the back
of the room, where Ron and Hermione were waiting.
“Ready?” Harry muttered.
“Wait till everyone’s gone,” said Hermione nervously.
“All right ...”
She approached Lockhart’s desk, a piece of paper
clutched tightly in her hand, Harry and Ron right
behind her.
“Er — Professor Lockhart?” Hermione stammered. “I
wanted to — to get this book out of the library. Just
for background reading.” She held out the piece of
paper, her hand shaking slightly. “But the thing is,
it’s in the Restricted Section of the library, so I need a
teacher to sign for it — I’m sure it would help me
understand what you say in Gadding with Ghouls
about slow-acting venoms — ”
“Ah, Gadding with GhoulsV’ said Lockhart, taking the
note from Hermione and smiling widely at her.
“Possibly my very favorite book. You enjoyed it?”
“Oh, yes,” said Hermione eagerly. “So clever, the way
you trapped that last one with the tea-strainer — ”
“Well, I’m sure no one will mind me giving the best
student of the year a little extra help,” said Lockhart
warmly, and he pulled out an enormous peacock
quill. “Yes, nice, isn’t it?” he said, misreading the
revolted look on Ron’s face. “I usually save it for book
signings.”
He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the note
and handed it back to Hermione.
“So, Harry,” said Lockhart, while Hermione folded the
note with fumbling fingers and slipped it into her bag.
“Tomorrow’s the first Quidditch match of the season, I
believe? Gryffindor against Slytherin, is it not? I hear
you’re a useful player. I was a Seeker, too. I was
asked to try for the National Squad, but preferred to
dedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces.
Still, if ever you feel the need for a little private
training, don’t hesitate to ask. Always happy to pass
on my expertise to less able players. ...”
Harry made an indistinct noise in his throat and then
hurried off after Ron and Hermione.
“I don’t believe it,” he said as the three of them
examined the signature on the note. “He didn’t even
look at the book we wanted.”
“That’s because he’s a brainless git,” said Ron. “But
who cares, we’ve got what we needed — ”
“He is not a brainless git,” said Hermione shrilly as
they half ran toward the library.
“Just because he said you were the best student of
the year — ”

They dropped their voices as they entered the muffled
stillness of the library. Madam Pince, the librarian,
was a thin, irritable woman who looked like an
underfed vulture.
“Moste Potente Potions?” she repeated suspiciously,
trying to take the note from Hermione; but Hermione
wouldn’t let go.
“I was wondering if I could keep it,” she said
breathlessly.
“Oh, come on,” said Ron, wrenching it from her grasp
and thrusting it at Madam Pince. “We’ll get you
another autograph. Lockhart ’ll sign anything if it
stands still long enough.”
Madam Pince held the note up to the light, as though
determined to detect a forgery, but it passed the test.
She stalked away between the lofty shelves and
returned several minutes later carrying a large and
moldy-looking book. Hermione put it carefully into
her bag and they left, trying not to walk too quickly or
look too guilty.
Five minutes later, they were barricaded in Moaning
Myrtle’s out-of-order bathroom once again. Hermione
had overridden Ron’s objections by pointing out that
it was the last place anyone in their right minds
would go, so they were guaranteed some privacy.
Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall, but
they were ignoring her, and she them.
Hermione opened Moste Potente Potions carefully, and
the three of them bent over the damp-spotted pages.
It was clear from a glance why it belonged in the
Restricted Section. Some of the potions had effects
almost too gruesome to think about, and there were
some very unpleasant illustrations, which included a

man who seemed to have been turned inside out and
a witch sprouting several extra pairs of arms out of
her head.
“Here it is,” said Hermione excitedly as she found the
page headed The Polyjuice Potion. It was decorated
with drawings of people halfway through transforming
into other people. Harry sincerely hoped the artist
had imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces.
“This is the most complicated potion I’ve ever seen,”
said Hermione as they scanned the recipe. “Lacewing
flies, leeches, fluxweed, and knotgrass,” she
murmured, running her finger down the list of
ingredients. “Well, they’re easy enough, they’re in the
student store-cupboard, we can help ourselves. ...
Oooh, look, powdered horn of a bicorn — don’t know
where we’re going to get that — shredded skin of a
boomslang — thatll be tricky, too — and of course a
bit of whoever we want to change into.”
“Excuse me?” said Ron sharply. “What d’you mean, a
bit of whoever we’re changing into? I’m drinking
nothing with Crabbe’s toenails in it — ”
Hermione continued as though she hadn’t heard him.
“We don’t have to worry about that yet, though,
because we add those bits last. ...”
Ron turned, speechless, to Harry, who had another
worry.
“D’you realize how much we’re going to have to steal,
Hermione? Shredded skin of a boomslang, that’s
definitely not in the students’ cupboard. What’re we
going to do, break into Snape’s private stores? I don’t
know if this is a good idea. ...”
Hermione shut the book with a snap. “Well, if you two are going to chicken out, fine,” she
said. There were bright pink patches on her cheeks
and her eyes were brighter than usual. “ I don’t want
to break rules, you know. / think threatening Muggle-
borns is far worse than brewing up a difficult potion.
But if you don’t want to find out if it’s Malfoy, I’ll go
straight to Madam Pince now and hand the book back
in — ” “I never thought I’d see the day when you’d be
persuading us to break rules,” said Ron. “All right,
we’ll do it. But not toenails, okay?”
“How long will it take to make, anyway?” said Harry
as Hermione, looking happier, opened the book again.
“Well, since the fluxweed has got to be picked at the
full moon and the lacewings have got to be stewed for
twenty-one days ... I’d say it’d be ready in about a
month, if we can get all the ingredients.”
“A month?” said Ron. “Malfoy could have attacked
half the Muggle-borns in the school by then!” But
Hermione ’s eyes narrowed dangerously again, and he
added swiftly, “But it’s the best plan we’ve got, so full
steam ahead, I say.”
However, while Hermione was checking that the coast
was clear for them to leave the bathroom, Ron
muttered to Harry, “It’ll be a lot less hassle if you can
just knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow.”
Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for a
while thinking about the coming Quidditch match. He
was nervous, mainly at the thought of what Wood
would say if Gryffindor lost, but also at the idea of
facing a team mounted on the fastest racing brooms

gold could buy. He had never wanted to beat
Slytherin so badly. After half an hour of lying there
with his insides churning, he got up, dressed, and
went down to breakfast early, where he found the rest
of the Gryffindor team huddled at the long, empty
table, all looking uptight and not speaking much.
As eleven o’clock approached, the whole school
started to make its way down to the Quidditch
stadium. It was a muggy sort of day with a hint of
thunder in the air. Ron and Hermione came hurrying
over to wish Harry good luck as he entered the locker
rooms. The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindor
robes, then sat down to listen to Wood’s usual pre-
match pep talk.
“Slytherin has better brooms than us,” he began. “No
point denying it. But we’ve got better people on our
brooms. We’ve trained harder than they have, we’ve
been flying in all weathers — ” (“Too true,” muttered
George Weasley. “I haven’t been properly dry since
August”) “ — and we’re going to make them rue the
day they let that little bit of slime, Malfoy, buy his
way onto their team.”
Chest heaving with emotion, Wood turned to Harry.
“It’ll be down to you, Harry, to show them that a
Seeker has to have something more than a rich
father. Get to that Snitch before Malfoy or die trying,
Harry, because we’ve got to win today, we’ve got to.”
“So no pressure, Harry,” said Fred, winking at him.
As they walked out onto the field, a roar of noise
greeted them; mainly cheers, because Ravenclaw and
Hufflepuff were anxious to see Slytherin beaten, but
the Slytherins in the crowd made their boos and
hisses heard, too. Madam Hooch, the Quidditch

teacher, asked Flint and Wood to shake hands, which
they did, giving each other threatening stares and
gripping rather harder than was necessary.
“On my whistle,” said Madam Hooch. “Three ... two ...
one ...”
With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward,
the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky.
Harry flew higher than any of them, squinting around
for the Snitch.
“All right there, Scarhead?” yelled Malfoy, shooting
underneath him as though to show off the speed of
his broom.
Harry had no time to reply. At that very moment, a
heavy black Bludger came pelting toward him; he
avoided it so narrowly that he felt it ruffle his hair as
it passed.
“Close one, Harry!” said George, streaking past him
with his club in his hand, ready to knock the Bludger
back toward a Slytherin. Harry saw George give the
Bludger a powerful whack in the direction of Adrian
Pucey, but the Bludger changed direction in midair
and shot straight for Harry again.
Harry dropped quickly to avoid it, and George
managed to hit it hard toward Malfoy. Once again, the
Bludger swerved like a boomerang and shot at Harry’s
head.
Harry put on a burst of speed and zoomed toward the
other end of the field. He could hear the Bludger
whistling along behind him. What was going on?
Bludgers never concentrated on one player like this; it
was their job to try and unseat as many people as
possible. ...

Fred Weasley was waiting for the Bludger at the other
end. Harry ducked as Fred swung at the Bludger with
all his might; the Bludger was knocked off course.
“Gotcha!” Fred yelled happily, but he was wrong; as
though it was magnetically attracted to Harry, the
Bludger pelted after him once more and Harry was
forced to fly off at full speed.
It had started to rain; Harry felt heavy drops fall onto
his face, splattering onto his glasses. He didn’t have a
clue what was going on in the rest of the game until
he heard Lee Jordan, who was commentating, say,
“Slytherin lead, sixty points to zero — ”
The Slytherins’ superior brooms were clearly doing
their jobs, and meanwhile the mad Bludger was doing
all it could to knock Harry out of the air. Fred and
George were now flying so close to him on either side
that Harry could see nothing at all except their flailing
arms and had no chance to look for the Snitch, let
alone catch it.
“Someone’s — tampered — with — this — Bludger — ”
Fred grunted, swinging his bat with all his might at it
as it launched a new attack on Harry.
“We need time out,” said George, trying to signal to
Wood and stop the Bludger breaking Harry’s nose at
the same time.
Wood had obviously got the message. Madam Hooch’s
whistle rang out and Harry, Fred, and George dived
for the ground, still trying to avoid the mad Bludger.
“What’s going on?” said Wood as the Gryffindor team
huddled together, while Slytherins in the crowd
jeered. “We’re being flattened. Fred, George, where
were you when that Bludger stopped Angelina
scoring?”
“We were twenty feet above her, stopping the other
Bludger from murdering Harry, Oliver,” said George
angrily. “Someone’s fixed it — it won’t leave Harry
alone. It hasn’t gone for anyone else all game. The
Slytherins must have done something to it.”
“But the Bludgers have been locked in Madam
Hooch’s office since our last practice, and there was
nothing wrong with them then. ...” said Wood,
anxiously.
Madam Hooch was walking toward them. Over her
shoulder, Harry could see the Slytherin team jeering
and pointing in his direction.
“Listen,” said Harry as she came nearer and nearer,
“with you two flying around me all the time the only
way I’m going to catch the Snitch is if it flies up my
sleeve. Go back to the rest of the team and let me deal
with the rogue one.”
“Don’t be thick,” said Fred. “It’ll take your head off.”
Wood was looking from Harry to the Weasleys.
“Oliver, this is insane,” said Alicia Spinnet angrily.
“You can’t let Harry deal with that thing on his own.
Let’s ask for an inquiry — ”
“If we stop now, we’ll have to forfeit the match!” said
Harry. “And we’re not losing to Slytherin just because
of a crazy Bludger! Come on, Oliver, tell them to leave
me alone!”
“This is all your fault,” George said angrily to Wood. “
‘Get the Snitch or die trying,’ what a stupid thing to
tell him—” Madam Hooch had joined them.
“Ready to resume play?” she asked Wood.
Wood looked at the determined look on Harry’s face.
“All right,” he said. “Fred, George, you heard Harry —
leave him alone and let him deal with the Bludger on
his own.”
The rain was falling more heavily now. On Madam
Hooch’s whistle, Harry kicked hard into the air and
heard the telltale whoosh of the Bludger behind him.
Higher and higher Harry climbed; he looped and
swooped, spiraled, zigzagged, and rolled. Slightly
dizzy, he nevertheless kept his eyes wide open, rain
was speckling his glasses and ran up his nostrils as
he hung upside down, avoiding another fierce dive
from the Bludger. He could hear laughter from the
crowd; he knew he must look very stupid, but the
rogue Bludger was heavy and couldn’t change
direction as quickly as Harry could; he began a kind
of roller-coaster ride around the edges of the stadium,
squinting through the silver sheets of rain to the
Gryffindor goal posts, where Adrian Pucey was trying
to get past Wood —
A whistling in Harry’s ear told him the Bludger had
just missed him again; he turned right over and sped
in the opposite direction.
“Training for the ballet, Potter?” yelled Malfoy as
Harry was forced to do a stupid kind of twirl in midair
to dodge the Bludger, and he fled, the Bludger trailing
a few feet behind him; and then, glaring back at

Malfoy in hatred, he saw it — the Golden Snitch. It
was hovering inches above Malfoy’s left ear — and
Malfoy, busy laughing at Harry, hadn’t seen it.
For an agonizing moment, Harry hung in midair, not
daring to speed toward Malfoy in case he looked up
and saw the Snitch.
WHAM.
He had stayed still a second too long. The Bludger
had hit him at last, smashed into his elbow, and
Harry felt his arm break. Dimly, dazed by the searing
pain in his arm, he slid sideways on his rain-
drenched broom, one knee still crooked over it, his
right arm dangling useless at his side — the Bludger
came pelting back for a second attack, this time
aiming at his face — Harry swerved out of the way,
one idea firmly lodged in his numb brain: get to
Malfoy.
Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for the
shimmering, sneering face below him and saw its eyes
widen with fear: Malfoy thought Harry was attacking
him.
“What the — ” he gasped, careening out of Harry’s
way.
Harry took his remaining hand off his broom and
made a wild snatch; he felt his fingers close on the
cold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom with
his legs, and there was a yell from the crowd below as
he headed straight for the ground, trying hard not to
pass out.
With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled off
his broom. His arm was hanging at a very strange
angle; riddled with pain, he heard, as though from a

distance, a good deal of whistling and shouting. He
focused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand.
“Aha,” he said vaguely. “We’ve won.”
And he fainted.
He came around, rain falling on his face, still lying on
the field, with someone leaning over him. He saw a
glitter of teeth.
“Oh, no, not you,” he moaned.
“Doesn’t know what he’s saying,” said Lockhart loudly
to the anxious crowd of Gryffindors pressing around
them. “Not to worry, Harry. I’m about to fix your
arm.”
“iVo!” said Harry. “I’ll keep it like this, thanks. ...”
He tried to sit up, but the pain was terrible. He heard
a familiar clicking noise nearby.
“I don’t want a photo of this, Colin,” he said loudly.
“Lie back, Harry,” said Lockhart soothingly. “It’s a
simple charm I’ve used countless times — ”
“Why can’t I just go to the hospital wing?” said Harry
through clenched teeth.
“He should really, Professor,” said a muddy Wood,
who couldn’t help grinning even though his Seeker
was injured. “Great capture, Harry, really
spectacular, your best yet, I’d say — ”
Through the thicket of legs around him, Harry
spotted Fred and George Weasley, wrestling the rogue
Bludger into a box. It was still putting up a terrific
fight.
“Stand back,” said Lockhart, who was rolling up his
jade-green sleeves.
“No — don’t — ” said Harry weakly, but Lockhart was
twirling his wand and a second later had directed it
straight at Harry’s arm.
A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harry’s
shoulder and spread all the way down to his
fingertips. It felt as though his arm was being
deflated. He didn’t dare look at what was happening.
He had shut his eyes, his face turned away from his
arm, but his worst fears were realized as the people
above him gasped and Colin Creevey began clicking
away madly. His arm didn’t hurt anymore — nor did
it feel remotely like an arm.
“Ah,” said Lockhart. “Yes. Well, that can sometimes
happen. But the point is, the bones are no longer
broken. That’s the thing to bear in mind. So, Harry,
just toddle up to the hospital wing — ah, Mr.
Weasley, Miss Granger, would you escort him? — and
Madam Pomfrey will be able to — er — tidy you up a
bit.”
As Harry got to his feet, he felt strangely lopsided.
Taking a deep breath he looked down at his right
side. What he saw nearly made him pass out again.
Poking out of the end of his robes was what looked
like a thick, flesh-colored rubber glove. He tried to
move his fingers. Nothing happened.
Lockhart hadn’t mended Harry’s bones. He had
removed them.
Madam Pomfrey wasn’t at all pleased.
“You should have come straight to me!” she raged,
holding up the sad, limp remainder of what, half an
hour before, had been a working arm. “I can mend
bones in a second — but growing them back — ”
“You will be able to, won’t you?” said Harry
desperately.
“I’ll be able to, certainly, but it will be painful,” said
Madam Pomfrey grimly, throwing Harry a pair of
pajamas. “You’ll have to stay the night. ...”
Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn around
Harry’s bed while Ron helped him into his pajamas. It
took a while to stuff the rubbery, boneless arm into a
sleeve.
“How can you stick up for Lockhart now, Hermione,
eh?” Ron called through the curtain as he pulled
Harry’s limp fingers through the cuff. “If Harry had
wanted deboning he would have asked.”
“Anyone can make a mistake,” said Hermione. “And it
doesn’t hurt anymore, does it, Harry?”
“No,” said Harry, getting into bed. “But it doesn’t do
anything else either.”
As he swung himself onto the bed, his arm flapped
pointlessly.
Hermione and Madam Pomfrey came around the
curtain. Madam Pomfrey was holding a large bottle of
something labeled Skele-Gro.
“You’re in for a rough night,” she said, pouring out a
steaming beakerful and handing it to him. “Regrowing
bones is a nasty business.”
So was taking the Skele-Gro. It burned Harry’s mouth
and throat as it went down, making him cough and
splutter. Still tut-tutting about dangerous sports and
inept teachers, Madam Pomfrey retreated, leaving Ron
and Hermione to help Harry gulp down some water.
“We won, though,” said Ron, a grin breaking across
his face. “That was some catch you made. Malfoy’s
face ... he looked ready to kill. ...”
“I want to know how he fixed that Bludger,” said
Hermione darkly.
“We can add that to the list of questions we’ll ask him
when we’ve taken the Polyjuice Potion,” said Harry,
sinking back onto his pillows. “I hope it tastes better
than this stuff. ...”
“If it’s got bits of Slytherins in it? You’ve got to be
joking,” said Ron.
The door of the hospital wing burst open at that
moment. Filthy and soaking wet, the rest of the
Gryffindor team had arrived to see Harry.
“Unbelievable flying, Harry,” said George. “I’ve just
seen Marcus Flint yelling at Malfoy. Something about
having the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing.
Malfoy didn’t seem too happy.”
They had brought cakes, sweets, and bottles of
pumpkin juice; they gathered around Harry’s bed and
were just getting started on what promised to be a
good party when Madam Pomfrey came storming over,
shouting, “This boy needs rest, he’s got thirty- three
bones to regrow! Out! OUT!”
And Harry was left alone, with nothing to distract him
from the stabbing pains in his limp arm.
Hours and hours later, Harry woke quite suddenly in
the pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of pain: His
arm now felt full of large splinters. For a second, he
thought that was what had woken him. Then, with a
thrill of horror, he realized that someone was
sponging his forehead in the dark.
“Get off!” he said loudly, and then, “Dobby\”
The house-elf’s goggling tennis ball eyes were peering
at Harry through the darkness. A single tear was
running down his long, pointed nose.
“Harry Potter came back to school,” he whispered
miserably. “Dobby warned and warned Harry Potter.
Ah sir, why didn’t you heed Dobby? Why didn’t Harry
Potter go back home when he missed the train?”
Harry heaved himself up on his pillows and pushed
Dobby’s sponge away.
“What’re you doing here?” he said. “And how did you
know I missed the train?”
Dobby’s lip trembled and Harry was seized by a
sudden suspicion.
“It was you!” he said slowly. “You stopped the barrier
from letting us through!”
“Indeed yes, sir,” said Dobby, nodding his head
vigorously, ears flapping. “Dobby hid and watched for
Harry Potter and sealed the gateway and Dobby had

to iron his hands afterward” — he showed Harry ten
long, bandaged fingers — “but Dobby didn’t care, sir,
for he thought Harry Potter was safe, and never did
Dobby dream that Harry Potter would get to school
another way!”
He was rocking backward and forward, shaking his
ugly head.
“Dobby was so shocked when he heard Harry Potter
was back at Hogwarts, he let his master’s dinner
burn! Such a flogging Dobby never had, sir. ...”
Harry slumped back onto his pillows.
“You nearly got Ron and me expelled,” he said
fiercely. “You’d better get lost before my bones come
back, Dobby, or I might strangle you.”
Dobby smiled weakly.
“Dobby is used to death threats, sir. Dobby gets them
five times a day at home.”
He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcase
he wore, looking so pathetic that Harry felt his anger
ebb away in spite of himself.
“Why d’you wear that thing, Dobby?” he asked
curiously.
“This, sir?” said Dobby, plucking at the pillowcase. “
Tis a mark of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir. Dobby
can only be freed if his masters present him with
clothes, sir. The family is careful not to pass Dobby
even a sock, sir, for then he would be free to leave
their house forever.”
Dobby mopped his bulging eyes and said suddenly,
“Harry Potter must go home! Dobby thought his
Bludger would be enough to make — ”
“Your Bludger?” said Harry, anger rising once more.
“What d’you mean, your Bludger? You made that
Bludger try and kill me?”
“Not kill you, sir, never kill you!” said Dobby,
shocked. “Dobby wants to save Harry Potter’s life!
Better sent home, grievously injured, than remain
here, sir! Dobby only wanted Harry Potter hurt
enough to be sent home!”
“Oh, is that all?” said Harry angrily. “I don’t suppose
you’re going to tell me why you wanted me sent home
in pieces?”
“Ah, if Harry Potter only knew!” Dobby groaned, more
tears dripping onto his ragged pillowcase. “If he knew
what he means to us, to the lowly, the enslaved, we
dregs of the magical world! Dobby remembers how it
was when He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was at the
height of his powers, sir! We house-elves were treated
like vermin, sir! Of course, Dobby is still treated like
that, sir,” he admitted, drying his face on the
pillowcase. “But mostly, sir, life has improved for my
kind since you triumphed over He-Who-Must-Not-Be-
Named. Harry Potter survived, and the Dark Lord’s
power was broken, and it was a new dawn, sir, and
Harry Potter shone like a beacon of hope for those of
us who thought the Dark days would never end, sir.
... And now, at Hogwarts, terrible things are to
happen, are perhaps happening already, and Dobby
cannot let Harry Potter stay here now that history is
to repeat itself, now that the Chamber of Secrets is
open once more — ”
Dobby froze, horrors truck, then grabbed Harry’s
water jug from his bedside table and cracked it over
his own head, toppling out of sight. A second later, he
crawled back onto the bed, cross-eyed, muttering,
“Bad Dobby, very bad Dobby ...”
“So there is a Chamber of Secrets?” Harry whispered.
“And — did you say it’s been opened before ? Tell me,
Dobby!”
He seized the elf’s bony wrist as Dobby’s hand inched
toward the water jug. “But I’m not Muggle-born —
how can I be in danger from the Chamber?”
“Ah, sir, ask no more, ask no more of poor Dobby,”
stammered the elf, his eyes huge in the dark. “Dark
deeds are planned in this place, but Harry Potter
must not be here when they happen — go home,
Harry Potter, go home. Harry Potter must not meddle
in this, sir, ’tis too dangerous — ”
“Who is it, Dobby?” Harry said, keeping a firm hold on
Dobby’s wrist to stop him from hitting himself with
the water jug again. “Who’s opened it? Who opened it
last time?”
“Dobby can’t, sir, Dobby can’t, Dobby mustn’t tell!”
squealed the elf. “Go home, Harry Potter, go home!”
“I’m not going anywhere!” said Harry fiercely. “One of
my best friends is Muggle-born; she’ll be first in line if
the Chamber really has been opened — ”
“Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends!”
moaned Dobby in a kind of miserable ecstasy. “So
noble! So valiant! But he must save himself, he must,
Harry Potter must not — ”
Dobby suddenly froze, his bat ears quivering. Harry
heard it, too. There were footsteps coming down the
passageway outside.
“Dobby must go!” breathed the elf, terrified. There
was a loud crack, and Harry’s fist was suddenly
clenched on thin air. He slumped back into bed, his
eyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as the
footsteps drew nearer.
Next moment, Dumbledore was backing into the
dormitory, wearing a long woolly dressing gown and a
nightcap. He was carrying one end of what looked like
a statue. Professor McGonagall appeared a second
later, carrying its feet. Together, they heaved it onto a
bed.
“Get Madam Pomfrey,” whispered Dumbledore, and
Professor McGonagall hurried past the end of Harry’s
bed out of sight. Harry lay quite still, pretending to be
asleep. He heard urgent voices, and then Professor
McGonagall swept back into view, closely followed by
Madam Pomfrey, who was pulling a cardigan on over
her nightdress. He heard a sharp intake of breath.
“What happened?” Madam Pomfrey whispered to
Dumbledore, bending over the statue on the bed.
“Another attack,” said Dumbledore. “Minerva found
him on the stairs.”
“There was a bunch of grapes next to him,” said
Professor McGonagall. “We think he was trying to
sneak up here to visit Potter.”
Harry’s stomach gave a horrible lurch. Slowly and
carefully, he raised himself a few inches so he could
look at the statue on the bed. A ray of moonlight lay
across its staring face.

It was Colin Creevey. His eyes were wide and his
hands were stuck up in front of him, holding his
camera.
“Petrified?” whispered Madam Pomfrey.
“Yes,” said Professor McGonagall. “But I shudder to
think ... If Albus hadn’t been on the way downstairs
for hot chocolate — who knows what might have — ”
The three of them stared down at Colin. Then
Dumbledore leaned forward and wrenched the
camera out of Colin’s rigid grip.
“You don’t think he managed to get a picture of his
attacker?” said Professor McGonagall eagerly.
Dumbledore didn’t answer. He opened the back of the
camera.
“Good gracious!” said Madam Pomfrey.
A jet of steam had hissed out of the camera. Harry,
three beds away, caught the acrid smell of burnt
plastic.
“Melted,” said Madam Pomfrey wonderingly. “All
melted ...”
“What does this mean, Albus?” Professor McGonagall
asked urgently.
“It means,” said Dumbledore, “that the Chamber of
Secrets is indeed open again.”
Madam Pomfrey clapped a hand to her mouth.
Professor McGonagall stared at Dumbledore.
“But, Albus ... surely ... who?”

“The question is not who,” said Dumbledore, his eyes
on Colin. “The question is, how. ...”
And from what Harry could see of Professor
McGonagall’s shadowy face, she didn’t understand
this any better than he did.   THE DUELING CLUB
Harry woke up on Sunday morning to find the
dormitory blazing with winter sunlight and his arm
reboned but very stiff. He sat up quickly and looked
over at Colin’s bed, but it had been blocked from view
by the high curtains Harry had changed behind
yesterday. Seeing that he was awake, Madam Pomfrey
came bustling over with a breakfast tray and then
began bending and stretching his arm and fingers.
“All in order,” she said as he clumsily fed himself
porridge left-handed. “When you’ve finished eating,
you may leave.”
Harry dressed as quickly as he could and hurried off
to Gryffindor Tower, desperate to tell Ron and
Hermione about Colin and Dobby, but they weren’t
there. Harry left to look for them, wondering where
they could have got to and feeling slightly hurt that
they weren’t interested in whether he had his bones
back or not.   As Harry passed the library, Percy Weasley strolled
out of it, looking in far better spirits than last time
they’d met.
“Oh, hello, Harry,” he said. “Excellent flying
yesterday, really excellent. Gryffindor has just taken
the lead for the House Cup — you earned fifty points!”
“You haven’t seen Ron or Hermione, have you?” said
Harry.
“No, I haven’t,” said Percy, his smile fading. “I hope
Ron’s not in another girls’ toilet ...”
Harry forced a laugh, watched Percy walk out of sight,
and then headed straight for Moaning Myrtle’s
bathroom. He couldn’t see why Ron and Hermione
would be in there again, but after making sure that
neither Filch nor any prefects were around, he opened
the door and heard their voices coming from a locked
stall.
“It’s me,” he said, closing the door behind him. There
was a clunk, a splash, and a gasp from within the
stall and he saw Hermione ’s eye peering through the
keyhole.
“Harry\” she said. “You gave us such a fright — come
in — how’s your arm?”
“Fine,” said Harry, squeezing into the stall. An old
cauldron was perched on the toilet, and a crackling
from under the rim told Harry they had lit a fire
beneath it. Conjuring up portable, waterproof fires
was a speciality of Hermione ’s.
“We ’d’ve come to meet you, but we decided to get
started on the Polyjuice Potion,” Ron explained as
Harry, with difficulty, locked the stall again. “We’ve
decided this is the safest place to hide it.”
Harry started to tell them about Colin, but Hermione
interrupted.
“We already know — we heard Professor McGonagall
telling Professor Flitwick this morning. That’s why we
decided we’d better get going — ”
“The sooner we get a confession out of Malfoy, the
better,” snarled Ron. “D’you know what I think? He
was in such a foul temper after the Quidditch match,
he took it out on Colin.”
“There’s something else,” said Harry, watching
Hermione tearing bundles of knotgrass and throwing
them into the potion. “Dobby came to visit me in the
middle of the night.”
Ron and Hermione looked up, amazed. Harry told
them everything Dobby had told him — or hadn’t told
him. Hermione and Ron listened with their mouths
open.
“The Chamber of Secrets has been opened before?”
Hermione said.
“This settles it,” said Ron in a triumphant voice.
“Lucius Malfoy must’ve opened the Chamber when he
was at school here and now he’s told dear old Draco
how to do it. It’s obvious. Wish Dobby ’d told you what
kind of monster’s in there, though. I want to know
how come nobody’s noticed it sneaking around the
school.”
“Maybe it can make itself invisible,” said Hermione,
prodding leeches to the bottom of the cauldron. “Or
maybe it can disguise itself — pretend to be a suit of

armor or something — I’ve read about Chameleon
Ghouls — ” “You read too much, Hermione,” said Ron, pouring
dead lacewings on top of the leeches. He crumpled up
the empty lacewing bag and looked at Harry.
“So Dobby stopped us from getting on the train and
broke your arm. ...” He shook his head. “You know
what, Harry? If he doesn’t stop trying to save your life
he’s going to kill you.” k k k The news that Colin Creevey had been attacked and
was now lying as though dead in the hospital wing
had spread through the entire school by Monday
morning. The air was suddenly thick with rumor and
suspicion. The first years were now moving around
the castle in tight-knit groups, as though scared they
would be attacked if they ventured forth alone.
Ginny Weasley, who sat next to Colin Creevey in
Charms, was distraught, but Harry felt that Fred and
George were going the wrong way about cheering her
up. They were taking turns covering themselves with
fur or boils and jumping out at her from behind
statues. They only stopped when Percy, apoplectic
with rage, told them he was going to write to Mrs.
Weasley and tell her Ginny was having nightmares.
Meanwhile, hidden from the teachers, a roaring trade
in talismans, amulets, and other protective devices
was sweeping the school. Neville Longbottom bought
a large, evil-smelling green onion, a pointed purple
crystal, and a rotting newt tail before the other
Gryffindor boys pointed out that he was in no danger;
he was a pureblood, and therefore unlikely to be
attacked.
“They went for Filch first,” Neville said, his round face
fearful. “And everyone knows I’m almost a Squib.”
In the second week of December Professor
McGonagall came around as usual, collecting names
of those who would be staying at school for
Christmas. Harry, Ron, and Hermione signed her list;
they had heard that Malfoy was staying, which struck
them as very suspicious. The holidays would be the
perfect time to use the Polyjuice Potion and try to
worm a confession out of him.
Unfortunately, the potion was only half finished. They
still needed the bicorn horn and the boomslang skin,
and the only place they were going to get them was
from Snape’s private stores. Harry privately felt he’d
rather face Slytherin’s legendary monster than let
Snape catch him robbing his office.
“What we need,” said Hermione briskly as Thursday
afternoon’s double Potions lesson loomed nearer, “is a
diversion. Then one of us can sneak into Snape’s
office and take what we need.”
Harry and Ron looked at her nervously.
“I think I’d better do the actual stealing,” Hermione
continued in a matter-of-fact tone. “You two will be
expelled if you get into any more trouble, and I’ve got
a clean record. So all you need to do is cause enough
mayhem to keep Snape busy for five minutes or so.”
Harry smiled feebly. Deliberately causing mayhem in
Snape’s Potions class was about as safe as poking a
sleeping dragon in the eye.
Potions lessons took place in one of the large
dungeons. Thursday afternoon’s lesson proceeded in
the usual way. Twenty cauldrons stood steaming
between the wooden desks, on which stood brass
scales and jars of ingredients. Snape prowled through
the fumes, making waspish remarks about the
Gryffindors’ work while the Slytherins sniggered
appreciatively. Draco Malfoy, who was Snape’s
favorite student, kept flicking puffer-fish eyes at Ron
and Harry, who knew that if they retaliated they
would get detention faster than you could say
“Unfair.”
Harry’s Swelling Solution was far too runny, but he
had his mind on more important things. He was
waiting for Hermione’s signal, and he hardly listened
as Snape paused to sneer at his watery potion. When
Snape turned and walked off to bully Neville,
Hermione caught Harry’s eye and nodded.
Harry ducked swiftly down behind his cauldron,
pulled one of Fred’s Filibuster fireworks out of his
pocket, and gave it a quick prod with his wand. The
firework began to fizz and sputter. Knowing he had
only seconds, Harry straightened up, took aim, and
lobbed it into the air; it landed right on target in
Goyle’s cauldron.
Goyle’s potion exploded, showering the whole class.
People shrieked as splashes of the Swelling Solution
hit them. Malfoy got a faceful and his nose began to
swell like a balloon; Goyle blundered around, his
hands over his eyes, which had expanded to the size
of a dinner plate — Snape was trying to restore calm
and find out what had happened. Through the
confusion, Harry saw Hermione slip quietly into
Snape’s office.
“Silence! SILENCE!” Snape roared. “Anyone who has
been splashed, come here for a Deflating Draught —
when I find out who did this — ”
Harry tried not to laugh as he watched Malfoy hurry
forward, his head drooping with the weight of a nose
like a small melon. As half the class lumbered up to
Snape ’s desk, some weighted down with arms like
clubs, others unable to talk through gigantic puffed-
up lips, Harry saw Hermione slide back into the
dungeon, the front of her robes bulging.
When everyone had taken a swig of antidote and the
various swellings had subsided, Snape swept over to
Goyle’s cauldron and scooped out the twisted black
remains of the firework. There was a sudden hush.
“If I ever find out who threw this,” Snape whispered, “I
shall make sure that person is expelled.”
Harry arranged his face into what he hoped was a
puzzled expression. Snape was looking right at him,
and the bell that rang ten minutes later could not
have been more welcome.
“He knew it was me,” Harry told Ron and Hermione as
they hurried back to Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. “I
could tell.”
Hermione threw the new ingredients into the cauldron
and began to stir feverishly.
“It’ll be ready in two weeks,” she said happily.
“Snape can’t prove it was you,” said Ron reassuringly
to Harry. “What can he do?”
“Knowing Snape, something foul,” said Harry as the
potion frothed and bubbled.

A week later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were walking
across the entrance hall when they saw a small knot
of people gathered around the notice board, reading a
piece of parchment that had just been pinned up.
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas beckoned them
over, looking excited.
“They’re starting a Dueling Club!” said Seamus. “First
meeting tonight! I wouldn’t mind dueling lessons;
they might come in handy one of these days. ...”
“What, you reckon Slytherin’s monster can duel?”
said Ron, but he, too, read the sign with interest.
“Could be useful,” he said to Harry and Hermione as
they went into dinner. “Shall we go?”
Harry and Hermione were all for it, so at eight o’clock
that evening they hurried back to the Great Hall. The
long dining tables had vanished and a golden stage
had appeared along one wall, lit by thousands of
candles floating overhead. The ceiling was velvety
black once more and most of the school seemed to be
packed beneath it, all carrying their wands and
looking excited.
“I wonder who’ll be teaching us?” said Hermione as
they edged into the chattering crowd. “Someone told
me Flitwick was a dueling champion when he was
young — maybe it’ll be him.”
“As long as it’s not — ” Harry began, but he ended on
a groan: Gilderoy Lockhart was walking onto the
stage, resplendent in robes of deep plum and
accompanied by none other than Snape, wearing his
usual black.
Lockhart waved an arm for silence and called,
“Gather round, gather round! Can everyone see me?
Can you all hear me? Excellent!
“Now, Professor Dumbledore has granted me
permission to start this little dueling club, to train
you all in case you ever need to defend yourselves as I
myself have done on countless occasions — for full
details, see my published works.
“Let me introduce my assistant, Professor Snape,”
said Lockhart, flashing a wide smile. “He tells me he
knows a tiny little bit about dueling himself and has
sportingly agreed to help me with a short
demonstration before we begin. Now, I don’t want any
of you youngsters to worry — you’ll still have your
Potions master when I’m through with him, never
fear!”
“Wouldn’t it be good if they finished each other off?”
Ron muttered in Harry’s ear.
Snape ’s upper lip was curling. Harry wondered why
Lockhart was still smiling; if Snape had been looking
at him like that he’d have been running as fast as he
could in the opposite direction.
Lockhart and Snape turned to face each other and
bowed; at least, Lockhart did, with much twirling of
his hands, whereas Snape jerked his head irritably.
Then they raised their wands like swords in front of
them.
“As you see, we are holding our wands in the
accepted combative position,” Lockhart told the silent
crowd. “On the count of three, we will cast our first
spells. Neither of us will be aiming to kill, of course.”
“I wouldn’t bet on that,” Harry murmured, watching
Snape baring his teeth.
“One — two — three — ”
Both of them swung their wands above their heads
and pointed them at their opponent; Snape cried:
“ ExpelliarmusV’ There was a dazzling flash of scarlet
light and Lockhart was blasted off his feet: He flew
backward off the stage, smashed into the wall, and
slid down it to sprawl on the floor.
Malfoy and some of the other Slytherins cheered.
Hermione was dancing on tiptoes. “Do you think he’s
all right?” she squealed through her fingers.
“Who cares?” said Harry and Ron together.
Lockhart was getting unsteadily to his feet. His hat
had fallen off and his wavy hair was standing on end.
“Well, there you have it!” he said, tottering back onto
the platform. “That was a Disarming Charm — as you
see, I’ve lost my wand — ah, thank you, Miss Brown
— yes, an excellent idea to show them that, Professor
Snape, but if you don’t mind my saying so, it was very
obvious what you were about to do. If I had wanted to
stop you it would have been only too easy — however,
I felt it would be instructive to let them see ...”
Snape was looking murderous. Possibly Lockhart had
noticed, because he said, “Enough demonstrating! I’m
going to come amongst you now and put you all into
pairs. Professor Snape, if you’d like to help me — ”
They moved through the crowd, matching up
partners. Lockhart teamed Neville with Justin Finch-
Fletchley, but Snape reached Harry and Ron first.
“Time to split up the dream team, I think,” he
sneered. “Weasley, you can partner Finnigan. Potter Harry moved automatically toward Hermione.
“I don’t think so,” said Snape, smiling coldly. “Mr.
Malfoy, come over here. Let’s see what you make of
the famous Potter. And you, Miss Granger — you can
partner Miss Bulstrode.”
Malfoy strutted over, smirking. Behind him walked a
Slytherin girl who reminded Harry of a picture he’d
seen in Holidays with Hags. She was large and square
and her heavy jaw jutted aggressively. Hermione gave
her a weak smile that she did not return.
“Face your partners!” called Lockhart, back on the
platform. “And bow!”
Harry and Malfoy barely inclined their heads, not
taking their eyes off each other.
“Wands at the ready!” shouted Lockhart. “When I
count to three, cast your charms to disarm your
opponents — only to disarm them — we don’t want
any accidents — one . . . two . . . three — ”
Harry swung his wand high, but Malfoy had already
started on “two”: His spell hit Harry so hard he felt as
though he’d been hit over the head with a saucepan.
He stumbled, but everything still seemed to be
working, and wasting no more time, Harry pointed his
wand straight at Malfoy and shouted, “Rictusempral”
A jet of silver light hit Malfoy in the stomach and he
doubled up, wheezing.
“I said disarm only\” Lockhart shouted in alarm over
the heads of the battling crowd, as Malfoy sank to his
knees; Harry had hit him with a Tickling Charm, and
he could barely move for laughing. Harry hung back,
with a vague feeling it would be unsporting to bewitch
Malfoy while he was on the floor, but this was a
mistake; gasping for breath, Malfoy pointed his wand
at Harry’s knees, choked, “Tarantallegral” and the
next second Harry’s legs began to jerk around out of
his control in a kind of quickstep.
“Stop! Stop!” screamed Lockhart, but Snape took
charge.
“Finite Incantatem\” he shouted; Harry’s feet stopped
dancing, Malfoy stopped laughing, and they were able
to look up.
A haze of greenish smoke was hovering over the
scene. Both Neville and Justin were lying on the floor,
panting; Ron was holding up an ashen-faced Seamus,
apologizing for whatever his broken wand had done;
but Hermione and Millicent Bulstrode were still
moving; Millicent had Hermione in a headlock and
Hermione was whimpering in pain; both their wands
lay forgotten on the floor. Harry leapt forward and
pulled Millicent off. It was difficult: She was a lot
bigger than he was.
“Dear, dear,” said Lockhart, skittering through the
crowd, looking at the aftermath of the duels. “Up you
go, Macmillan. ... Careful there, Miss Fawcett. ...
Pinch it hard, it’ll stop bleeding in a second, Boot —
“I think I’d better teach you how to block unfriendly
spells,” said Lockhart, standing flustered in the midst
of the hall. He glanced at Snape, whose black eyes
glinted, and looked quickly away. “Let’s have a
volunteer pair — Longbottom and Finch-Fletchley,
how about you — ”
“A bad idea, Professor Lockhart,” said Snape, gliding
over like a large and malevolent bat. “Longbottom
causes devastation with the simplest spells. We’ll be
sending what’s left of Finch-Fletchley up to the
hospital wing in a matchbox.” Neville’s round, pink
face went pinker. “How about Malfoy and Potter?”
said Snape with a twisted smile.
“Excellent idea!” said Lockhart, gesturing Harry and
Malfoy into the middle of the hall as the crowd backed
away to give them room.
“Now, Harry,” said Lockhart. “When Draco points his
wand at you, you do this.”
He raised his own wand, attempted a complicated
sort of wiggling action, and dropped it. Snape smirked
as Lockhart quickly picked it up, saying, “Whoops —
my wand is a little overexcited — ”
Snape moved closer to Malfoy, bent down, and
whispered something in his ear. Malfoy smirked, too.
Harry looked up nervously at Lockhart and said,
“Professor, could you show me that blocking thing
again?”
“Scared?” muttered Malfoy, so that Lockhart couldn’t
hear him.
“You wish,” said Harry out of the corner of his mouth.
Lockhart cuffed Harry merrily on the shoulder. “Just
do what I did, Harry!”
“What, drop my wand?”
But Lockhart wasn’t listening.
“Three — two — one — go!” he shouted.
Malfoy raised his wand quickly and bellowed,
“ Serpensortial”
The end of his wand exploded. Harry watched, aghast,
as a long black snake shot out of it, fell heavily onto
the floor between them, and raised itself, ready to
strike. There were screams as the crowd backed
swiftly away, clearing the floor.
“Don’t move, Potter,” said Snape lazily, clearly
enjoying the sight of Harry standing motionless, eye
to eye with the angry snake. “I’ll get rid of it. ...”
“Allow me!” shouted Lockhart. He brandished his
wand at the snake and there was a loud bang; the
snake, instead of vanishing, flew ten feet into the air
and fell back to the floor with a loud smack. Enraged,
hissing furiously, it slithered straight toward Justin
Finch-Fletchley and raised itself again, fangs exposed,
poised to strike.
Harry wasn’t sure what made him do it. He wasn’t
even aware of deciding to do it. All he knew was that
his legs were carrying him forward as though he was
on casters and that he had shouted stupidly at the
snake, “Leave him alone!” And miraculously —
inexplicably — the snake slumped to the floor, docile
as a thick, black garden hose, its eyes now on Harry.
Harry felt the fear drain out of him. He knew the
snake wouldn’t attack anyone now, though how he
knew it, he couldn’t have explained.
He looked up at Justin, grinning, expecting to see
Justin looking relieved, or puzzled, or even grateful —
but certainly not angry and scared.

“What do you think you’re playing at?” he shouted,
and before Harry could say anything, Justin had
turned and stormed out of the hall.
Snape stepped forward, waved his wand, and the
snake vanished in a small puff of black smoke.
Snape, too, was looking at Harry in an unexpected
way: It was a shrewd and calculating look, and Harry
didn’t like it. He was also dimly aware of an ominous
muttering all around the walls. Then he felt a tugging
on the back of his robes.
“Come on,” said Ron’s voice in his ear. “Move — come
on—” Ron steered him out of the hall, Hermione hurrying
alongside them. As they went through the doors, the
people on either side drew away as though they were
frightened of catching something. Harry didn’t have a
clue what was going on, and neither Ron nor
Hermione explained anything until they had dragged
him all the way up to the empty Gryffindor common
room. Then Ron pushed Harry into an armchair and
said, “You’re a Parselmouth. Why didn’t you tell us?”
“I’m a what?” said Harry.
“A Parselmouth .!” said Ron. “You can talk to snakes!”
“I know,” said Harry. “I mean, that’s only the second
time I’ve ever done it. I accidentally set a boa
constrictor on my cousin Dudley at the zoo once —
long story — but it was telling me it had never seen
Brazil and I sort of set it free without meaning to —
that was before I knew I was a wizard — ”
“A boa constrictor told you it had never seen Brazil?”
Ron repeated faintly.
“So?” said Harry. “I bet loads of people here can do it.” “Oh, no they can’t,” said Ron. “It’s not a very common
gift. Harry, this is bad.”
“What’s bad?” said Harry, starting to feel quite angry.
“What’s wrong with everyone? Listen, if I hadn’t told
that snake not to attack Justin — ”
“Oh, that’s what you said to it?”
“What d’you mean? You were there — you heard me “I heard you speaking Parseltongue,” said Ron.
“Snake language. You could have been saying
anything — no wonder Justin panicked, you sounded
like you were egging the snake on or something — it
was creepy, you know — ”
Harry gaped at him.
“I spoke a different language? But — I didn’t realize —
how can I speak a language without knowing I can
speak it?”
Ron shook his head. Both he and Hermione were
looking as though someone had died. Harry couldn’t
see what was so terrible.
“D’you want to tell me what’s wrong with stopping a
massive snake biting off Justin’s head?” he said.
“What does it matter how I did it as long as Justin
doesn’t have to join the Headless Hunt?”
“It matters,” said Hermione, speaking at last in a
hushed voice, “because being able to talk to snakes
was what Salazar Slytherin was famous for. That’s
why the symbol of Slytherin House is a serpent.”

Harry’s mouth fell open. “Exactly,” said Ron. “And now the whole school’s
going to think you’re his great-great-great-great-
grandson or something — ”
“But I’m not,” said Harry, with a panic he couldn’t
quite explain.
“You’ll find that hard to prove,” said Hermione. “He
lived about a thousand years ago; for all we know,
you could be.” •k k k Harry lay awake for hours that night. Through a gap
in the curtains around his four-poster he watched
snow starting to drift past the tower window and
wondered ...
Could he be a descendant of Salazar Slytherin? He
didn’t know anything about his father’s family, after
all. The Dursleys had always forbidden questions
about his wizarding relatives.
Quietly, Harry tried to say something in Parseltongue.
The words wouldn’t come. It seemed he had to be
face-to-face with a snake to do it.
But I’m in Gryffindor, Harry thought. The Sorting Hat
wouldn’t have put me in here if I had Slytherin blood. Ah, said a nasty little voice in his brain, but the
Sorting Hat wanted to put you in Slytherin, don’t you
remember?
Harry turned over. He’d see Justin the next day in
Herbology and he’d explain that he’d been calling the

snake off, not egging it on, which (he thought angrily,
pummeling his pillow) any fool should have realized.
By next morning, however, the snow that had begun
in the night had turned into a blizzard so thick that
the last Herbology lesson of the term was canceled:
Professor Sprout wanted to fit socks and scarves on
the Mandrakes, a tricky operation she would entrust
to no one else, now that it was so important for the
Mandrakes to grow quickly and revive Mrs. Norris and
Colin Creevey.
Harry fretted about this next to the fire in the
Gryffindor common room, while Ron and Hermione
used their time off to play a game of wizard chess.
“For heaven’s sake, Harry,” said Hermione,
exasperated, as one of Ron’s bishops wrestled her
knight off his horse and dragged him off the board.
“Go and find Justin if it’s so important to you.”
So Harry got up and left through the portrait hole,
wondering where Justin might be.
The castle was darker than it usually was in daytime
because of the thick, swirling gray snow at every
window. Shivering, Harry walked past classrooms
where lessons were taking place, catching snatches of
what was happening within. Professor McGonagall
was shouting at someone who, by the sound of it, had
turned his friend into a badger. Resisting the urge to
take a look, Harry walked on by, thinking that Justin
might be using his free time to catch up on some
work, and deciding to check the library first.
A group of the Hufflepuffs who should have been in
Herbology were indeed sitting at the back of the
library, but they didn’t seem to be working. Between
the long lines of high bookshelves, Harry could see

that their heads were close together and they were
having what looked like an absorbing conversation.
He couldn’t see whether Justin was among them. He
was walking toward them when something of what
they were saying met his ears, and he paused to
listen, hidden in the Invisibility section.
“So anyway,” a stout boy was saying, “I told Justin to
hide up in our dormitory. I mean to say, if Potter’s
marked him down as his next victim, it’s best if he
keeps a low profile for a while. Of course, Justin’s
been waiting for something like this to happen ever
since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born. Justin
actually told him he’d been down for Eton. That’s not
the kind of thing you bandy about with Slytherin’s
heir on the loose, is it?”
“You definitely think it is Potter, then, Ernie?” said a
girl with blonde pigtails anxiously.
“Hannah,” said the stout boy solemnly, “he’s a
Parselmouth. Everyone knows that’s the mark of a
Dark wizard. Have you ever heard of a decent one
who could talk to snakes? They called Slytherin
himself Serpent-tongue.”
There was some heavy murmuring at this, and Ernie
went on, “Remember what was written on the wall?
Enemies of the Heir, Beware. Potter had some sort of
run-in with Filch. Next thing we know, Filch ’s cat’s
attacked. That first year, Creevey, was annoying
Potter at the Quidditch match, taking pictures of him
while he was lying in the mud. Next thing we know —
Creevey ’s been attacked.”
“He always seems so nice, though,” said Hannah
uncertainly, “and, well, he’s the one who made You-
Know-Who disappear. He can’t be all bad, can he?”
Ernie lowered his voice mysteriously, the Hufflepuffs
bent closer, and Harry edged nearer so that he could
catch Ernie’s words.
“No one knows how he survived that attack by You-
Know-Who. I mean to say, he was only a baby when it
happened. He should have been blasted into
smithereens. Only a really powerful Dark wizard
could have survived a curse like that.” He dropped his
voice until it was barely more than a whisper, and
said, “ That’s probably why You-Know-Who wanted to
kill him in the first place. Didn’t want another Dark
Lord competing with him. I wonder what other powers
Potter’s been hiding?”
Harry couldn’t take anymore. Clearing his throat
loudly, he stepped out from behind the bookshelves.
If he hadn’t been feeling so angry, he would have
found the sight that greeted him funny: Every one of
the Hufflepuffs looked as though they had been
Petrified by the sight of him, and the color was
draining out of Ernie’s face.
“Hello,” said Harry. “I’m looking for Justin Finch-
Fletchley.”
The Hufflepuffs’ worst fears had clearly been
confirmed. They all looked fearfully at Ernie.
“What do you want with him?” said Ernie in a
quavering voice.
“I wanted to tell him what really happened with that
snake at the Dueling Club,” said Harry.
Ernie bit his white lips and then, taking a deep
breath, said, “We were all there. We saw what
happened.”
“Then you noticed that after I spoke to it, the snake
backed off?” said Harry.
“All I saw,” said Ernie stubbornly, though he was
trembling as he spoke, “was you speaking
Parseltongue and chasing the snake toward Justin.”
“I didn’t chase it at him!” Harry said, his voice
shaking with anger. “It didn’t even touch him!”
“It was a very near miss,” said Ernie. “And in case
you’re getting ideas,” he added hastily, “I might tell
you that you can trace my family back through nine
generations of witches and warlocks and my blood’s
as pure as anyone’s, so — ”
“I don’t care what sort of blood you’ve got!” said Harry
fiercely. “Why would I want to attack Muggle-borns?”
“I’ve heard you hate those Muggles you live with,” said
Ernie swiftly.
“It’s not possible to live with the Dursleys and not
hate them,” said Harry. “I’d like to see you try it.”
He turned on his heel and stormed out of the library,
earning himself a reproving glare from Madam Pince,
who was polishing the gilded cover of a large
spellbook.
Harry blundered up the corridor, barely noticing
where he was going, he was in such a fury. The result
was that he walked into something very large and
solid, which knocked him backward onto the floor.
“Oh, hello, Hagrid,” Harry said, looking up.
Hagrid’s face was entirely hidden by a woolly, snow-
covered balaclava, but it couldn’t possibly be anyone

else, as he filled most of the corridor in his moleskin
overcoat. A dead rooster was hanging from one of his
massive, gloved hands.
“All righ’, Harry?” he said, pulling up the balaclava so
he could speak. “Why aren’t yeh in class?”
“Canceled,” said Harry, getting up. “What’re you doing
in here?”
Hagrid held up the limp rooster.
“Second one killed this term,” he explained. “It’s
either foxes or a Blood-Suckin’ Bugbear, an’ I need
the headmaster’s permission ter put a charm around
the hen coop.”
He peered more closely at Harry from under his thick,
snow-flecked eyebrows.
“Yeh sure yeh’re all righ’? Yeh look all hot an’
bothered — ”
Harry couldn’t bring himself to repeat what Ernie and
the rest of the Hufflepuffs had been saying about him.
“It’s nothing,” he said. “I’d better get going, Hagrid, it’s
Transfiguration next and I’ve got to pick up my
books.”
He walked off, his mind still full of what Ernie had
said about him.
“Justin’s been waiting for something like this to
happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-
born. ...”
Harry stamped up the stairs and turned along
another corridor, which was particularly dark; the

torches had been extinguished by a strong, icy draft
that was blowing through a loose windowpane. He
was halfway down the passage when he tripped
headlong over something lying on the floor.
He turned to squint at what he’d fallen over and felt
as though his stomach had dissolved.
Justin Finch-Fletchley was lying on the floor, rigid
and cold, a look of shock frozen on his face, his eyes
staring blankly at the ceiling. And that wasn’t all.
Next to him was another figure, the strangest sight
Harry had ever seen.
It was Nearly Headless Nick, no longer pearly-white
and transparent, but black and smoky, floating
immobile and horizontal, six inches off the floor. His
head was half off and his face wore an expression of
shock identical to Justin’s.
Harry got to his feet, his breathing fast and shallow,
his heart doing a kind of drumroll against his ribs. He
looked wildly up and down the deserted corridor and
saw a line of spiders scuttling as fast as they could
away from the bodies. The only sounds were the
muffled voices of teachers from the classes on either
side.
He could run, and no one would ever know he had
been there. But he couldn’t just leave them lying
here. ... He had to get help. ... Would anyone believe
he hadn’t had anything to do with this?
As he stood there, panicking, a door right next to him
opened with a bang. Peeves the Poltergeist came
shooting out.
“Why, it’s potty wee Potter!” cackled Peeves, knocking
Harry’s glasses askew as he bounced past him.
“What’s Potter up to? Why’s Potter lurking — ”
Peeves stopped, halfway through a midair somersault.
Upside down, he spotted Justin and Nearly Headless
Nick. He flipped the right way up, filled his lungs and,
before Harry could stop him, screamed, “ATTACK!
ATTACK! ANOTHER ATTACK! NO MORTAL OR
GHOST IS SAFE! RUN FOR YOUR LIVES!
ATTAAAACK!”
Crash — crash — crash — door after door flew open
along the corridor and people flooded out. For several
long minutes, there was a scene of such confusion
that Justin was in danger of being squashed and
people kept standing in Nearly Headless Nick. Harry
found himself pinned against the wall as the teachers
shouted for quiet. Professor McGonagall came
running, followed by her own class, one of whom still
had black-and-white- striped hair. She used her wand
to set off a loud bang, which restored silence, and
ordered everyone back into their classes. No sooner
had the scene cleared somewhat than Ernie the
Hufflepuff arrived, panting, on the scene.
“ Caught in the act!” Ernie yelled, his face stark white,
pointing his finger dramatically at Harry.
“That will do, Macmillan!” said Professor McGonagall
sharply.
Peeves was bobbing overhead, now grinning wickedly,
surveying the scene; Peeves always loved chaos. As
the teachers bent over Justin and Nearly Headless
Nick, examining them, Peeves broke into song:
“Oh, Potter, you rotter, oh, what have you done,
You’re killing off students, you think it’s good fun — ” “That’s enough, Peeves!” barked Professor
McGonagall, and Peeves zoomed away backward, with
his tongue out at Harry.
Justin was carried up to the hospital wing by
Professor Flitwick and Professor Sinistra of the
Astronomy department, but nobody seemed to know
what to do for Nearly Headless Nick. In the end,
Professor McGonagall conjured a large fan out of thin
air, which she gave to Ernie with instructions to waft
Nearly Headless Nick up the stairs. This Ernie did,
fanning Nick along like a silent black hovercraft. This
left Harry and Professor McGonagall alone together.
“This way, Potter,” she said.
“Professor,” said Harry at once, “I swear I didn’t — ”
“This is out of my hands, Potter,” said Professor
McGonagall curtly.
They marched in silence around a corner and she
stopped before a large and extremely ugly stone
gargoyle.
“Lemon drop!” she said. This was evidently a
password, because the gargoyle sprang suddenly to
life and hopped aside as the wall behind him split in
two. Even full of dread for what was coming, Harry
couldn’t fail to be amazed. Behind the wall was a
spiral staircase that was moving smoothly upward,
like an escalator. As he and Professor McGonagall
stepped onto it, Harry heard the wall thud closed
behind them. They rose upward in circles, higher and
higher, until at last, slightly dizzy, Harry saw a
gleaming oak door ahead, with a brass knocker in the
shape of a griffin.

He knew now where he was being taken. This must be
where Dumbledore lived.
THE POLY JUICE POTION
They stepped off the stone staircase at the top, and
Professor McGonagall rapped on the door. It opened
silently and they entered. Professor McGonagall told
Harry to wait and left him there, alone.
Harry looked around. One thing was certain: of all the
teachers’ offices Harry had visited so far this year,
Dumbledore’s was by far the most interesting. If he
hadn’t been scared out of his wits that he was about
to be thrown out of school, he would have been very
pleased to have a chance to look around it.
It was a large and beautiful circular room, full of
funny little noises. A number of curious silver
instruments stood on spindle-legged tables, whirring
and emitting little puffs of smoke. The walls were
covered with portraits of old headmasters and
headmistresses, all of whom were snoozing gently in
their frames. There was also an enormous, claw-
footed desk, and, sitting on a shelf behind it, a
shabby, tattered wizard’s hat — the Sorting Hat   Harry hesitated. He cast a wary eye around the
sleeping witches and wizards on the walls. Surely it
couldn’t hurt if he took the hat down and tried it on
again? Just to see ... just to make sure it had put him
in the right House —
He walked quietly around the desk, lifted the hat from
its shelf, and lowered it slowly onto his head. It was
much too large and slipped down over his eyes, just
as it had done the last time he’d put it on. Harry
stared at the black inside of the hat, waiting. Then a
small voice said in his ear, “Bee in your bonnet, Harry
Potter?”
“Er, yes,” Harry muttered. “Er — sorry to bother you
— I wanted to ask — ”
“You’ve been wondering whether I put you in the right
House,” said the hat smartly. “Yes ... you were
particularly difficult to place. But I stand by what I
said before” — Harry’s heart leapt — “you would have
done well in Slytherin — ”
Harry’s stomach plummeted. He grabbed the point of
the hat and pulled it off. It hung limply in his hand,
grubby and faded. Harry pushed it back onto its
shelf, feeling sick.
“You’re wrong,” he said aloud to the still and silent
hat. It didn’t move. Harry backed away, watching it.
Then a strange, gagging noise behind him made him
wheel around.
He wasn’t alone after all. Standing on a golden perch
behind the door was a decrepit-looking bird that
resembled a half-plucked turkey. Harry stared at it
and the bird looked balefully back, making its gagging
noise again. Harry thought it looked very ill. Its eyes
were dull and, even as Harry watched, a couple more
feathers fell out of its tail.
Harry was just thinking that all he needed was for
Dumbledore ’s pet bird to die while he was alone in
the office with it, when the bird burst into flames.
Harry yelled in shock and backed away into the desk.
He looked feverishly around in case there was a glass
of water somewhere but couldn’t see one; the bird,
meanwhile, had become a fireball; it gave one loud
shriek and next second there was nothing but a
smoldering pile of ash on the floor.
The office door opened. Dumbledore came in, looking
very somber.
“Professor,” Harry gasped. “Your bird — I couldn’t do
anything — he just caught fire — ”
To Harry’s astonishment, Dumbledore smiled.
“About time, too,” he said. “He’s been looking dreadful
for days; I’ve been telling him to get a move on.”
He chuckled at the stunned look on Harry’s face.
“Fawkes is a phoenix, Harry. Phoenixes burst into
flame when it is time for them to die and are reborn
from the ashes. Watch him ...”
Harry looked down in time to see a tiny, wrinkled,
newborn bird poke its head out of the ashes. It was
quite as ugly as the old one.
“It’s a shame you had to see him on a Burning Day,”
said Dumbledore, seating himself behind his desk.
“He’s really very handsome most of the time,
wonderful red and gold plumage. Fascinating

creatures, phoenixes. They can carry immensely
heavy loads, their tears have healing powers, and
they make highly faithful pets.”
In the shock of Fawkes catching fire, Harry had
forgotten what he was there for, but it all came back
to him as Dumbledore settled himself in the high
chair behind the desk and fixed Harry with his
penetrating, light-blue stare.
Before Dumbledore could speak another word,
however, the door of the office flew open with an
almighty bang and Hagrid burst in, a wild look in his
eyes, his balaclava perched on top of his shaggy black
head and the dead rooster still swinging from his
hand.
“It wasn’ Harry, Professor Dumbledore!” said Hagrid
urgently. “I was talkin’ ter him seconds before that
kid was found, he never had time, sir — ”
Dumbledore tried to say something, but Hagrid went
ranting on, waving the rooster around in his
agitation, sending feathers everywhere.
“ — it can’t’ve bin him, I’ll swear it in front o’ the
Ministry o’ Magic if I have to — ”
“Hagrid, I — ”
“ — yeh’ve got the wrong boy, sir, I know Harry never “Hagridl” said Dumbledore loudly. “I do not think that
Harry attacked those people.”
“Oh,” said Hagrid, the rooster falling limply at his
side. “Right. I’ll wait outside then, Headmaster.”
And he stomped out looking embarrassed.
“You don’t think it was me, Professor?” Harry
repeated hopefully as Dumbledore brushed rooster
feathers off his desk.
“No, Harry, I don’t,” said Dumbledore, though his face
was somber again. “But I still want to talk to you.”
Harry waited nervously while Dumbledore considered
him, the tips of his long fingers together.
“I must ask you, Harry, whether there is anything
you’d like to tell me,” he said gently. “Anything at all.”
Harry didn’t know what to say. He thought of Malfoy
shouting, “You’ll be next, Mudbloods!” and of the
Polyjuice Potion simmering away in Moaning Myrtle’s
bathroom. Then he thought of the disembodied voice
he had heard twice and remembered what Ron had
said: “ Hearing voices no one else can hear isn’t a good
sign, even in the wizarding world.” He thought, too,
about what everyone was saying about him, and his
growing dread that he was somehow connected with
Salazar Slytherin. ...
“No,” said Harry. “There isn’t anything, Professor. ...”
The double attack on Justin and Nearly Headless
Nick turned what had hitherto been nervousness into
real panic. Curiously, it was Nearly Headless Nick’s
fate that seemed to worry people most. What could
possibly do that to a ghost? people asked each other;
what terrible power could harm someone who was
already dead? There was almost a stampede to book
seats on the Hogwarts Express so that students could
go home for Christmas.
“At this rate, well be the only ones left,” Ron told
Harry and Hermione. “Us, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle.
What a jolly holiday it’s going to be.”
Crabbe and Goyle, who always did whatever Malfoy
did, had signed up to stay over the holidays, too. But
Harry was glad that most people were leaving. He was
tired of people skirting around him in the corridors,
as though he were about to sprout fangs or spit
poison; tired of all the muttering, pointing, and
hissing as he passed.
Fred and George, however, found all this very funny.
They went out of their way to march ahead of Harry
down the corridors, shouting, “Make way for the Heir
of Slytherin, seriously evil wizard coming through. ...”
Percy was deeply disapproving of this behavior.
“It is not a laughing matter,” he said coldly.
“Oh, get out of the way, Percy,” said Fred. “Harry’s in
a hurry.”
“Yeah, he’s off to the Chamber of Secrets for a cup of
tea with his fanged servant,” said George, chortling.
Ginny didn’t find it amusing either.
“Oh, don’t,” she wailed every time Fred asked Harry
loudly who he was planning to attack next, or when
George pretended to ward Harry off with a large clove
of garlic when they met.
Harry didn’t mind; it made him feel better that Fred
and George, at least, thought the idea of his being
Slytherin ’s heir was quite ludicrous. But their antics
seemed to be aggravating Draco Malfoy, who looked
increasingly sour each time he saw them at it.

“It’s because he’s bursting to say it’s really him,” said
Ron knowingly. “You know how he hates anyone
beating him at anything, and you’re getting all the
credit for his dirty work.”
“Not for long,” said Hermione in a satisfied tone. “The
Polyjuice Potion’s nearly ready. We’ll be getting the
truth out of him any day now.”
At last the term ended, and a silence deep as the
snow on the grounds descended on the castle. Harry
found it peaceful, rather than gloomy, and enjoyed
the fact that he, Hermione, and the Weasleys had the
run of Gryffindor Tower, which meant they could play
Exploding Snap loudly without bothering anyone, and
practice dueling in private. Fred, George, and Ginny
had chosen to stay at school rather than visit Bill in
Egypt with Mr. and Mrs. Weasley. Percy, who
disapproved of what he termed their childish
behavior, didn’t spend much time in the Gryffindor
common room. He had already told them pompously
that he was only staying over Christmas because it
was his duty as a prefect to support the teachers
during this troubled time.
Christmas morning dawned, cold and white. Harry
and Ron, the only ones left in their dormitory, were
woken very early by Hermione, who burst in, fully
dressed and carrying presents for them both.
“Wake up,” she said loudly, pulling back the curtains
at the window.
“Hermione — you’re not supposed to be in here — ”
said Ron, shielding his eyes against the light.
“Merry Christmas to you, too,” said Hermione,
throwing him his present. “I’ve been up for nearly an
hour, adding more lace-wings to the potion. It’s
ready.”
Harry sat up, suddenly wide awake.
“Are you sure?”
“Positive,” said Hermione, shirting Scabbers the rat so
that she could sit down on the end of Ron’s four-
poster. “If we’re going to do it, I say it should be
tonight.”
At that moment, Hedwig swooped into the room,
carrying a very small package in her beak.
“Hello,” said Harry happily as she landed on his bed.
“Are you speaking to me again?”
She nibbled his ear in an affectionate sort of way,
which was a far better present than the one that she
had brought him, which turned out to be from the
Dursleys. They had sent Harry a toothpick and a note
telling him to find out whether he’d be able to stay at
Hogwarts for the summer vacation, too.
The rest of Harry’s Christmas presents were far more
satisfactory. Hagrid had sent him a large tin of treacle
toffee, which Harry decided to soften by the fire before
eating; Ron had given him a book called Flying with
the Cannons, a book of interesting facts about his
favorite Quidditch team, and Hermione had bought
him a luxury eagle-feather quill. Harry opened the
last present to find a new, hand-knitted sweater from
Mrs. Weasley and a large plum cake. He read her card
with a fresh surge of guilt, thinking about Mr.
Weasley’s car (which hadn’t been seen since its crash
with the Whomping Willow), and the bout of rule-
breaking he and Ron were planning next.
No one, not even someone dreading taking Polyjuice
Potion later, could fail to enjoy Christmas dinner at
Hogwarts.
The Great Hall looked magnificent. Not only were
there a dozen frost-covered Christmas trees and thick
streamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing the
ceiling, but enchanted snow was falling, warm and
dry, from the ceiling. Dumbledore led them in a few of
his favorite carols, Hagrid booming more and more
loudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed.
Percy, who hadn’t noticed that Fred had bewitched
his prefect badge so that it now read “Pin-head,” kept
asking them all what they were sniggering at. Harry
didn’t even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud,
snide remarks about his new sweater from the
Slytherin table. With a bit of luck, Malfoy would be
getting his comeuppance in a few hours’ time.
Harry and Ron had barely finished their third
helpings of Christmas pudding when Hermione
ushered them out of the hall to finalize their plans for
the evening.
“We still need a bit of the people you’re changing
into,” said Hermione matter-of-factly, as though she
were sending them to the supermarket for laundry
detergent. “And obviously, it’ll be best if you can get
something of Crabbe’s and Goyle’s; they’re Malfoy’s
best friends, he’ll tell them anything. And we also
need to make sure the real Crabbe and Goyle can’t
burst in on us while we’re interrogating him.
“I’ve got it all worked out,” she went on smoothly,
ignoring Harry’s and Ron’s stupefied faces. She held
up two plump chocolate cakes. “I’ve filled these with a
simple Sleeping Draught. All you have to do is make
sure Crabbe and Goyle find them. You know how
greedy they are, they’re bound to eat them. Once

they’re asleep, pull out a few of their hairs and hide
them in a broom closet.”
Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other.
“Hermione, I don’t think — ”
“That could go seriously wrong — ”
But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlike
the one Professor McGonagall sometimes had.
“The potion will be useless without Crabbe’s and
Goyle’s hair,” she said sternly. “You do want to
investigate Malfoy, don’t you?”
“Oh, all right, all right,” said Harry. “But what about
you? Whose hair are you ripping out?”
“I’ve already got mine!” said Hermione brightly,
pulling a tiny bottle out of her pocket and showing
them the single hair inside it. “Remember Millicent
Bulstrode wrestling with me at the Dueling Club? She
left this on my robes when she was trying to strangle
me! And she’s gone home for Christmas — so I’ll just
have to tell the Slytherins I’ve decided to come back.”
When Hermione had bustled off to check on the
Polyjuice Potion again, Ron turned to Harry with a
doom-laden expression.
“Have you ever heard of a plan where so many things
could go wrong?”
But to Harry’s and Ron’s utter amazement, stage one
of the operation went just as smoothly as Hermione
had said. They lurked in the deserted entrance hall
after Christmas tea, waiting for Crabbe and Goyle
who had remained alone at the Slytherin table,

shoveling down fourth helpings of trifle. Harry had
perched the chocolate cakes on the end of the
banisters. When they spotted Crabbe and Goyle
coming out of the Great Hall, Harry and Ron hid
quickly behind a suit of armor next to the front door.
“How thick can you get?” Ron whispered ecstatically
as Crabbe gleefully pointed out the cakes to Goyle
and grabbed them. Grinning stupidly, they stuffed the
cakes whole into their large mouths. For a moment,
both of them chewed greedily, looks of triumph on
their faces. Then, without the smallest change of
expression, they both keeled over backward onto the
floor.
