
Typically, ten minutes into the lesson Hermione
managed to repel Neville’s muttered Jelly-Legs Jinx
without uttering a single word, a feat that would
surely have earned her twenty points for Gryffindor
from any reasonable teacher, thought Harry bitterly,
but which Snape ignored. He swept between them as
they practiced, looking just as much like an
overgrown bat as ever, lingering to watch Harry and
Ron struggling with the task.
Ron, who was supposed to be jinxing Harry, was
purple in the face, his lips tightly compressed to save
himself from the temptation of muttering the
incantation. Harry had his wand raised, waiting on
tenterhooks to repel a jinx that seemed unlikely ever
to come. “Pathetic, Weasley,” said Snape, after a while. “Here
— let me show you — ” He turned his wand on Harry so fast that Harry
reacted instinctively; all thought of nonverbal spells
forgotten, he yelled, “Protegol” His Shield Charm was so strong Snape was knocked
off-balance and hit a desk. The whole class had
looked around and now watched as Snape righted
himself, scowling. “Do you remember me telling you we are practicing
nonverbal spells, Potter?” “Yes,” said Harry stiffly. “Yes, sir.” “There’s no need to call me ‘sir,’ Professor.” The words had escaped him before he knew what he
was saying. Several people gasped, including
Hermione. Behind Snape, however, Ron, Dean, and
Seamus grinned appreciatively. “Detention, Saturday night, my office,” said Snape. “I
do not take cheek from anyone, Potter ... not even ‘the
Chosen One. ’ ” “That was brilliant, Harry!” chortled Ron, once they
were safely on their way to break a short while later.  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“You really shouldn’t have said it,” said Hermione,
frowning at Ron. “What made you?” “He tried to jinx me, in case you didn’t notice!” fumed
Harry. “I had enough of that during those
Occlumency lessons! Why doesn’t he use another
guinea pig for a change? What’s Dumbledore playing
at, anyway, letting him teach Defense? Did you hear
him talking about the Dark Arts? He loves them! All
that unfixed, indestructible stuff — ” “Well,” said Hermione, “I thought he sounded a bit
like you.” “Like me?” “Yes, when you were telling us what it’s like to face
Voldemort. You said it wasn’t just memorizing a
bunch of spells, you said it was just you and your
brains and your guts — well, wasn’t that what Snape
was saying? That it really comes down to being brave
and quick-thinking?” Harry was so disarmed that she had thought his
words as well worth memorizing as The Standard
Book of Spells that he did not argue. “Harry! Hey, Harry!” Harry looked around; Jack Sloper, one of the Beaters
on last year’s Gryffindor Quidditch team, was
hurrying toward him holding a roll of parchment. “For you,” panted Sloper. “Listen, I heard you’re the
new Captain. When’re you holding trials?” “I’m not sure yet,” said Harry, thinking privately that
Sloper would be very lucky to get back on the team.
“I’ll let you know.”
“Oh, right. I was hoping it’d be this weekend — ” But Harry was not listening; he had just recognized
the thin, slanting writing on the parchment. Leaving
Sloper in mid-sentence, he hurried away with Ron
and Hermione, unrolling the parchment as he went. Dear Harry, I would like to start our private lessons this Saturday.
Kindly come along to my office at  p.m. I hope you are
enjoying your first day back at school. Yours sincerely, Albus Dumbledore P. S. I enjoy Acid Pops. “He enjoys Acid Pops?” said Ron, who had read the
message over Harry’s shoulder and was looking
perplexed. “It’s the password to get past the gargoyle outside his
study,” said Harry in a low voice. “Ha! Snape’s not
going to be pleased. ... I won’t be able to do his
detention!” He, Ron, and Hermione spent the whole of break
speculating on what Dumbledore would teach Harry.
Ron thought it most likely to be spectacular jinxes
and hexes of the type the Death Eaters would not
know. Hermione said such things were illegal, and
thought it much more likely that Dumbledore wanted
to teach Harry advanced Defensive magic. After
break, she went off to Arithmancy while Harry and
Ron returned to the common room, where they
grudgingly started Snape’s homework. This turned
out to be so complex that they still had not finished
when Hermione joined them for their after-lunch free
period (though she considerably speeded up the
process). They had only just finished when the bell
rang for the afternoon’s double Potions and they beat
the familiar path down to the dungeon classroom that
had, for so long, been Snape’s. When they arrived in the corridor they saw that there
were only a dozen people progressing to N.E.W.T.
level. Crabbe and Goyle had evidently failed to achieve
the required O.W.L. grade, but four Slytherins had
made it through, including Malfoy. Four Ravenclaws
were there, and one Hufflepuff, Ernie Macmillan,
whom Harry liked despite his rather pompous
manner. “Harry,” Ernie said portentously, holding out his hand
as Harry approached, “didn’t get a chance to speak in
Defense Against the Dark Arts this morning. Good
lesson, I thought, but Shield Charms are old hat, of
course, for us old D.A. lags ... And how are you, Ron
— Hermione?” Before they could say more than “fine,” the dungeon
door opened and Slughorn’s belly preceded him out of
the door. As they filed into the room, his great walrus
mustache curved above his beaming mouth, and he
greeted Harry and Zabini with particular enthusiasm. The dungeon was, most unusually, already full of
vapors and odd smells. Harry, Ron, and Hermione
sniffed interestedly as they passed large, bubbling
cauldrons. The four Slytherins took a table together,
as did the four Ravenclaws. This left Harry, Ron, and
Hermione to share a table with Ernie. They chose the
one nearest a gold-colored cauldron that was emitting
one of the most seductive scents Harry had ever
inhaled: Somehow it reminded him simultaneously of
treacle tart, the woody smell of a broomstick handle,
and something flowery he thought he might have
smelled at the Burrow. He found that he was
breathing very slowly and deeply and that the potion’s
fumes seemed to be filling him up like drink. A great
contentment stole over him; he grinned across at Ron,
who grinned back lazily. “Now then, now then, now then,” said Slughorn,
whose massive outline was quivering through the
many shimmering vapors. “Scales out, everyone, and
potion kits, and don’t forget your copies of Advanced
Potion-Making. ...” “Sir?” said Harry, raising his hand. “Harry, m’boy?” “I haven’t got a book or scales or anything — nor’s
Ron — we didn’t realize we’d be able to do the
N.E.W.T., you see — ” “Ah, yes, Professor McGonagall did mention ... not to
worry, my dear boy, not to worry at all. You can use
ingredients from the store cupboard today, and I’m
sure we can lend you some scales, and we’ve got a
small stock of old books here, they’ll do until you can
write to Flourish and Blotts. ...” Slughorn strode over to a corner cupboard and, after
a moment’s foraging, emerged with two very battered-
looking copies of Advanced Potion-Making by Libatius
Borage, which he gave to Harry and Ron along with
two sets of tarnished scales. “Now then,” said Slughorn, returning to the front of
the class and inflating his already bulging chest so
that the buttons on his waistcoat threatened to burst
off, “I’ve prepared a few potions for you to have a look
at, just out of interest, you know. These are the kind
of thing you ought to be able to make after completing
your N.E.W.T.s. You ought to have heard of ’em, even
if you haven’t made ’em yet. Anyone tell me what this
one is?” He indicated the cauldron nearest the Slytherin table.
Harry raised himself slightly in his seat and saw what
looked like plain water boiling away inside it. Hermione’s well-practiced hand hit the air before
anybody else’s; Slughorn pointed at her. “It’s Veritaserum, a colorless, odorless potion that
forces the drinker to tell the truth,” said Hermione. “Very good, very good!” said Slughorn happily. “Now,”
he continued, pointing at the cauldron nearest the
Ravenclaw table, “this one here is pretty well known.
... Featured in a few Ministry leaflets lately too ... Who
can — ?” Hermione’s hand was fastest once more. “It’s Polyjuice Potion, sir,” she said. Harry too had recognized the slow-bubbling, mudlike
substance in the second cauldron, but did not resent
Hermione getting the credit for answering the
question; she, after all, was the one who had
succeeded in making it, back in their second year. “Excellent, excellent! Now, this one here ... yes, my
dear?” said Slughorn, now looking slightly bemused,
as Hermione’s hand punched the air again. “It’s Amortentia!”
“It is indeed. It seems almost foolish to ask,” said
Slughorn, who was looking mightily impressed, “but I
assume you know what it does?” “It’s the most powerful love potion in the world!” said
Hermione. “Quite right! You recognized it, I suppose, by its
distinctive mother-of-pearl sheen?” “And the steam rising in characteristic spirals,” said
Hermione enthusiastically, “and it’s supposed to
smell differently to each of us, according to what
attracts us, and I can smell freshly mown grass and
new parchment and — ” But she turned slightly pink and did not complete the
sentence. “May I ask your name, my dear?” said Slughorn,
ignoring Hermione’s embarrassment. “Hermione Granger, sir.” “Granger? Granger? Can you possibly be related to
Hector Dagworth-Granger, who founded the Most
Extraordinary Society of Potioneers?” “No, I don’t think so, sir. I’m Muggle-born, you see.” Harry saw Malfoy lean close to Nott and whisper
something; both of them sniggered, but Slughorn
showed no dismay; on the contrary, he beamed and
looked from Hermione to Harry, who was sitting next
to her. “Oho! ‘One of my best friends is Muggle-born, and
she’s the best in our yeah’ I’m assuming this is the
very friend of whom you spoke, Harry?”
“Yes, sir,” said Harry. “Well, well, take twenty well-earned points for
Gryffindor, Miss Granger,” said Slughorn genially. Malfoy looked rather as he had done the time
Hermione had punched him in the face. Hermione
turned to Harry with a radiant expression and
whispered, “Did you really tell him I’m the best in the
year? Oh, Harry!” “Well, what’s so impressive about that?” whispered
Ron, who for some reason looked annoyed. “You are
the best in the year — I’d’ve told him so if he’d asked
me!” Hermione smiled but made a “shhing” gesture, so that
they could hear what Slughorn was saying. Ron
looked slightly disgruntled. “Amortentia doesn’t really create love, of course. It is
impossible to manufacture or imitate love. No, this
will simply cause a powerful infatuation or obsession.
It is probably the most dangerous and powerful
potion in this room — oh yes,” he said, nodding
gravely at Malfoy and Nott, both of whom were
smirking skeptically. “When you have seen as much
of life as I have, you will not underestimate the power
of obsessive love. ... “And now,” said Slughorn, “it is time for us to start
work.” “Sir, you haven’t told us what’s in this one,” said
Ernie Macmillan, pointing at a small black cauldron
standing on Slughorn ’s desk. The potion within was
splashing about merrily; it was the color of molten
gold, and large drops were leaping like goldfish above
the surface, though not a particle had spilled.
“Oho,” said Slughorn again. Harry was sure that
Slughorn had not forgotten the potion at all, but had
waited to be asked for dramatic effect. “Yes. That.
Well, that one, ladies and gentlemen, is a most
curious little potion called Felix Felicis. I take it,” he
turned, smiling, to look at Hermione, who had let out
an audible gasp, “that you know what Felix Felicis
does, Miss Granger?” “It’s liquid luck,” said Hermione excitedly. “It makes
you lucky!” The whole class seemed to sit up a little straighter.
Now all Harry could see of Malfoy was the back of his
sleek blond head, because he was at last giving
Slughorn his full and undivided attention. “Quite right, take another ten points for Gryffindor.
Yes, it’s a funny little potion, Felix Felicis,” said
Slughorn. “Desperately tricky to make, and
disastrous to get wrong. However, if brewed correctly,
as this has been, you will find that all your endeavors
tend to succeed ... at least until the effects wear off.” “Why don’t people drink it all the time, sir?” said
Terry Boot eagerly. “Because if taken in excess, it causes giddiness,
recklessness, and dangerous overconfidence,” said
Slughorn. “Too much of a good thing, you know ...
highly toxic in large quantities. But taken sparingly,
and very occasionally ...” “Have you ever taken it, sir?” asked Michael Corner
with great interest. “Twice in my life,” said Slughorn. “Once when I was
twenty-four, once when I was fifty-seven. Two
tablespoonfuls taken with breakfast. Two perfect
days.” He gazed dreamily into the distance. Whether he was
playacting or not, thought Harry, the effect was good. “And that,” said Slughorn, apparently coming back to
earth, “is what I shall be offering as a prize in this
lesson.” There was silence in which every bubble and gurgle of
the surrounding potions seemed magnified tenfold. “One tiny bottle of Felix Felicis,” said Slughorn, taking
a minuscule glass bottle with a cork in it out of his
pocket and showing it to them all. “Enough for twelve
hours’ luck. From dawn till dusk, you will be lucky in
everything you attempt. “Now, I must give you warning that Felix Felicis is a
banned substance in organized competitions . . .
sporting events, for instance, examinations, or
elections. So the winner is to use it on an ordinary
day only . . . and watch how that ordinary day becomes
extraordinary! “So,” said Slughorn, suddenly brisk, “how are you to
win my fabulous prize? Well, by turning to page ten of
Advanced Potion-Making. We have a little over an hour
left to us, which should be time for you to make a
decent attempt at the Draught of Living Death. I know
it is more complex than anything you have attempted
before, and I do not expect a perfect potion from
anybody. The person who does best, however, will win
little Felix here. Off you go!” There was a scraping as everyone drew their
cauldrons toward them and some loud clunks as
people began adding weights to their scales, but  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
nobody spoke. The concentration within the room was
almost tangible. Harry saw Malfoy riffling feverishly
through his copy of Advanced Potion-Making. It could
not have been clearer that Malfoy really wanted that
lucky day. Harry bent swiftly over the tattered book
Slughorn had lent him. To his annoyance he saw that the previous owner had
scribbled all over the pages, so that the margins were
as black as the printed portions. Bending low to
decipher the ingredients (even here, the previous
owner had made annotations and crossed things out)
Harry hurried off toward the store cupboard to find
what he needed. As he dashed back to his cauldron,
he saw Malfoy cutting up valerian roots as fast as he
could. Everyone kept glancing around at what the rest of the
class was doing; this was both an advantage and a
disadvantage of Potions, that it was hard to keep your
work private. Within ten minutes, the whole place
was full of bluish steam. Hermione, of course, seemed
to have progressed furthest. Her potion already
resembled the “smooth, black currant-colored liquid”
mentioned as the ideal halfway stage. Having finished chopping his roots, Harry bent low
over his book again. It was really very irritating,
having to try and decipher the directions under all the
stupid scribbles of the previous owner, who for some
reason had taken issue with the order to cut up the
sopophorous bean and had written in the alternative
instruction: Crush with flat side of silver dagger,
releases juice better than cutting.
“Sir, I think you knew my grandfather, Abraxas
Malfoy?” Harry looked up; Slughorn was just passing the
Slytherin table. “Yes,” said Slughorn, without looking at Malfoy, “I
was sorry to hear he had died, although of course it
wasn’t unexpected, dragon pox at his age. ...” And he walked away. Harry bent back over his
cauldron, smirking. He could tell that Malfoy had
expected to be treated like Harry or Zabini; perhaps
even hoped for some preferential treatment of the type
he had learned to expect from Snape. It looked as
though Malfoy would have to rely on nothing but
talent to win the bottle of Felix Felicis. The sopophorous bean was proving very difficult to
cut up. Harry turned to Hermione. “Can I borrow your silver knife?” She nodded impatiently, not taking her eyes off her
potion, which was still deep purple, though according
to the book ought to be turning a light shade of lilac
by now. Harry crushed his bean with the flat side of the
dagger. To his astonishment, it immediately exuded
so much juice he was amazed the shriveled bean
could have held it all. Hastily scooping it all into the
cauldron he saw, to his surprise, that the potion
immediately turned exactly the shade of lilac
described by the textbook. His annoyance with the previous owner vanishing on
the spot, Harry now squinted at the next line of
instructions. According to the book, he had to stir
counterclockwise until the potion turned clear as
water. According to the addition the previous owner
had made, however, he ought to add a clockwise stir
after every seventh counterclockwise stir. Could the
old owner be right twice? Harry stirred counterclockwise, held his breath, and
stirred once clockwise. The effect was immediate. The
potion turned palest pink. “How are you doing that?” demanded Hermione, who
was red-faced and whose hair was growing bushier
and bushier in the fumes from her cauldron; her
potion was still resolutely purple. “Add a clockwise stir — ” “No, no, the book says counterclockwise!” she
snapped. Harry shrugged and continued what he was doing.
Seven stirs counterclockwise, one clockwise, pause ...
seven stirs counterclockwise, one stir clockwise ... Across the table, Ron was cursing fluently under his
breath; his potion looked like liquid licorice. Harry
glanced around. As far as he could see, no one else’s
potion had turned as pale as his. He felt elated,
something that had certainly never happened before
in this dungeon. “And time’s ... up!” called Slughorn. “Stop stirring,
please!” Slughorn moved slowly among the tables, peering into
cauldrons. He made no comment, but occasionally
gave the potions a stir or a sniff. At last he reached
the table where Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ernie
were sitting. He smiled ruefully at the tarlike Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
substance in Ron’s cauldron. He passed over Ernie’s
navy concoction. Hermione’s potion he gave an
approving nod. Then he saw Harry’s, and a look of
incredulous delight spread over his face. “The clear winner!” he cried to the dungeon. “Excellent, excellent, Harry! Good lord, it’s clear
you’ve inherited your mother’s talent. She was a dab
hand at Potions, Lily was! Here you are, then, here
you are — one bottle of Felix Felicis, as promised, and
use it well!” Harry slipped the tiny bottle of golden liquid into his
inner pocket, feeling an odd combination of delight at
the furious looks on the Slytherins’ faces and guilt at
the disappointed expression on Hermione’s. Ron
looked simply dumbfounded. “How did you do that?” he whispered to Harry as they
left the dungeon. “Got lucky, I suppose,” said Harry, because Malfoy
was within earshot. Once they were securely ensconced at the Gryffindor
table for dinner, however, he felt safe enough to tell
them. Hermione’s face became stonier with every
word he uttered. “I s’pose you think I cheated?” he finished, aggravated
by her expression. “Well, it wasn’t exactly your own work, was it?” she
said stiffly. “He only followed different instructions to ours,” said
Ron. “Could’ve been a catastrophe, couldn’t it? But he
took a risk and it paid off.” He heaved a sigh.
“Slughorn could’ve handed me that book, but no, I get
the one no one’s ever written on. Puked on, by the
look of page fifty-two, but — ” “Hang on,” said a voice close by Harry’s left ear and
he caught a sudden waft of that flowery smell he had
picked up in Slughorn’s dungeon. He looked around
and saw that Ginny had joined them. “Did I hear
right? You’ve been taking orders from something
someone wrote in a book, Harry?” She looked alarmed and angry. Harry knew what was
on her mind at once. “It’s nothing,” he said reassuringly, lowering his voice.
“It’s not like, you know, Riddle’s diary. It’s just an old
textbook someone’s scribbled on.” “But you’re doing what it says?” “I just tried a few of the tips written in the margins,
honestly, Ginny, there’s nothing funny — ” “Ginny’s got a point,” said Hermione, perking up at
once. “We ought to check that there’s nothing odd
about it. I mean, all these funny instructions, who
knows?” “Hey!” said Harry indignantly, as she pulled his copy
of Advanced Potion-Making out of his bag and raised
her wand. “ Specialis Revelio\” she said, rapping it smartly on the
front cover. Nothing whatsoever happened. The book simply lay
there, looking old and dirty and dog-eared. “Finished?” said Harry irritably. “Or d’you want to
wait and see if it does a few backflips?”
“It seems all right,” said Hermione, still staring at the
book suspiciously. “I mean, it really does seem to be
... just a textbook.” “Good. Then I’ll have it back,” said Harry, snatching it
off the table, but it slipped from his hand and landed
open on the floor. Nobody else was looking. Harry bent low to retrieve
the book, and as he did so, he saw something
scribbled along the bottom of the back cover in the
same small, cramped handwriting as the instructions
that had won him his bottle of Felix Felicis, now
safely hidden inside a pair of socks in his trunk
upstairs. This Book is the Property of the Half-Blood Prince.
THE HOUSE OF GAUNT For the rest of the week’s Potions lessons Harry
continued to follow the Half-Blood Prince’s
instructions wherever they deviated from Libatius
Borage’s, with the result that by their fourth lesson
Slughorn was raving about Harry’s abilities, saying
that he had rarely taught anyone so talented. Neither
Ron nor Hermione was delighted by this. Although
Harry had offered to share his book with both of
them, Ron had more difficulty deciphering the
handwriting than Harry did, and could not keep
asking Harry to read aloud or it might look
suspicious. Hermione, meanwhile, was resolutely
plowing on with what she called the “official”
instructions, but becoming increasingly bad-tempered
as they yielded poorer results than the Prince’s. Harry wondered vaguely who the Half-Blood Prince
had been. Although the amount of homework they
had been given prevented him from reading the whole
of his copy of Advanced Potion-Making, he had
skimmed through it sufficiently to see that there was
barely a page on which the Prince had not made
additional notes, not all of them concerned with
potion-making. Here and there were directions for
what looked like spells that the Prince had made up
himself. “Or herself,” said Hermione irritably, overhearing
Harry pointing some of these out to Ron in the
common room on Saturday evening. “It might have
been a girl. I think the handwriting looks more like a
girl’s than a boy’s.” “The Half-Blood Prince, he was called,” Harry said.
“How many girls have been Princes?” Hermione seemed to have no answer to this. She
merely scowled and twitched her essay on The
Principles of Re materialization away from Ron, who
was trying to read it upside down. Harry looked at his watch and hurriedly put the old
copy of Advanced Potion-Making back into his bag. “It’s five to eight, I’d better go, I’ll be late for
Dumbledore.” “Ooooh!” gasped Hermione, looking up at once. “Good
luck! We’ll wait up, we want to hear what he teaches
you!” “Hope it goes okay,” said Ron, and the pair of them
watched Harry leave through the portrait hole. Harry proceeded through deserted corridors, though
he had to step hastily behind a statue when Professor
Trelawney appeared around a corner, muttering to
herself as she shuffled a pack of dirty-looking playing
cards, reading them as she walked.
“Two of spades: conflict,” she murmured, as she
passed the place where Harry crouched, hidden.
“Seven of spades: an ill omen. Ten of spades: violence.
Knave of spades: a dark young man, possibly
troubled, one who dislikes the questioner — ” She stopped dead, right on the other side of Harry’s
statue. “Well, that can’t be right,” she said, annoyed, and
Harry heard her reshuffling vigorously as she set off
again, leaving nothing but a whiff of cooking sherry
behind her. Harry waited until he was quite sure she
had gone, then hurried off again until he reached the
spot in the seventh-floor corridor where a single
gargoyle stood against the wall. “Acid Pops,” said Harry, and the gargoyle leapt aside;
the wall behind it slid apart, and a moving spiral
stone staircase was revealed, onto which Harry
stepped, so that he was carried in smooth circles up
to the door with the brass knocker that led to
Dumbledore’s office. Harry knocked. “Come in,” said Dumbledore’s voice. “Good evening, sir,” said Harry, walking into the
headmaster’s office. “Ah, good evening, Harry. Sit down,” said
Dumbledore, smiling. “I hope you’ve had an enjoyable
first week back at school?” “Yes, thanks, sir,” said Harry. “You must have been busy, a detention under your
belt already!”
“Er,” began Harry awkwardly, but Dumbledore did
not look too stern. “I have arranged with Professor Snape that you will
do your detention next Saturday instead.” “Right,” said Harry, who had more pressing matters
on his mind than S nape’s detention, and now looked
around surreptitiously for some indication of what
Dumbledore was planning to do with him this
evening. The circular office looked just as it always
did; the delicate silver instruments stood on spindle-
legged tables, puffing smoke and whirring; portraits of
previous headmasters and headmistresses dozed in
their frames, and Dumbledore’s magnificent phoenix,
Fawkes, stood on his perch behind the door, watching
Harry with bright interest. It did not even look as
though Dumbledore had cleared a space for dueling
practice. “So, Harry,” said Dumbledore, in a businesslike voice.
“You have been wondering, I am sure, what I have
planned for you during these — for want of a better
word — lessons?” “Yes, sir.” “Well, I have decided that it is time, now that you
know what prompted Lord Voldemort to try and kill
you fifteen years ago, for you to be given certain
information.” There was a pause. “You said, at the end of last term, you were going to
tell me everything,” said Harry. It was hard to keep a
note of accusation from his voice. “Sir,” he added.
“And so I did,” said Dumbledore placidly. “I told you
everything I know. From this point forth, we shall be
leaving the firm foundation of fact and journeying
together through the murky marshes of memory into
thickets of wildest guesswork. From here on in, Harry, I may be as woefully wrong as Humphrey
Belcher, who believed the time was ripe for a cheese
cauldron.” “But you think you’re right?” said Harry. “Naturally I do, but as I have already proven to you, I
make mistakes like the next man. In fact, being —
forgive me — rather cleverer than most men, my
mistakes tend to be correspondingly huger.” “Sir,” said Harry tentatively, “does what you’re going
to tell me have anything to do with the prophecy? Will
it help me . . . survive?” “It has a very great deal to do with the prophecy,” said
Dumbledore, as casually as if Harry had asked him
about the next day’s weather, “and I certainly hope
that it will help you to survive.” Dumbledore got to his feet and walked around the
desk, past Harry, who turned eagerly in his seat to
watch Dumbledore bending over the cabinet beside
the door. When Dumbledore straightened up, he was
holding a familiar shallow stone basin etched with
odd markings around its rim. He placed the Pensieve
on the desk in front of Harry. “You look worried.” Harry had indeed been eyeing the Pensieve with some
apprehension. His previous experiences with the odd
device that stored and revealed thoughts and
memories, though highly instructive, had also been
uncomfortable. The last time he had disturbed its
contents, he had seen much more than he would
have wished. But Dumbledore was smiling. “This time, you enter the Pensieve with me ... and,
even more unusually, with permission.” “Where are we going, sir?” “For a trip down Bob Ogden’s memory lane,” said
Dumbledore, pulling from his pocket a crystal bottle
containing a swirling silvery- white substance. “Who was Bob Ogden?” “He was employed by the Department of Magical Law
Enforcement,” said Dumbledore. “He died some time
ago, but not before I had tracked him down and
persuaded him to confide these recollections to me. We are about to accompany him on a visit he made in
the course of his duties. If you will stand, Harry ...” But Dumbledore was having difficulty pulling out the
stopper of the crystal bottle: His injured hand seemed
stiff and painful. “Shall — shall I, sir?” “No matter, Harry — ” Dumbledore pointed his wand at the bottle and the
cork flew out. “Sir — how did you injure your hand?” Harry asked
again, looking at the blackened fingers with a mixture
of revulsion and pity. “Now is not the moment for that story, Harry. Not yet.
We have an appointment with Bob Ogden.”
Dumbledore tipped the silvery contents of the bottle
into the Pensieve, where they swirled and shimmered,
neither liquid nor gas. “After you,” said Dumbledore, gesturing toward the
bowl. Harry bent forward, took a deep breath, and plunged
his face into the silvery substance. He felt his feet
leave the office floor; he was falling, falling through
whirling darkness and then, quite suddenly, he was
blinking in dazzling sunlight. Before his eyes had
adjusted, Dumbledore landed beside him. They were standing in a country lane bordered by
high, tangled hedgerows, beneath a summer sky as
bright and blue as a forget-me-not. Some ten feet in
front of them stood a short, plump man wearing
enormously thick glasses that reduced his eyes to
molelike specks. He was reading a wooden signpost
that was sticking out of the brambles on the left-hand
side of the road. Harry knew this must be Ogden; he
was the only person in sight, and he was also wearing
the strange assortment of clothes so often chosen by
inexperienced wizards trying to look like Muggles: in
this case, a frock coat and spats over a striped one-
piece bathing costume. Before Harry had time to do
more than register his bizarre appearance, however,
Ogden had set off at a brisk walk down the lane. Dumbledore and Harry followed. As they passed the
wooden sign, Harry looked up at its two arms. The
one pointing back the way they had come read: GREAT HANGLETON,  MILES. The arm pointing
after Ogden said LITTLE HANGLETON,  MILE. They walked a short way with nothing to see but the
hedgerows, the wide blue sky overhead and the
swishing, frock-coated figure ahead. Then the lane
curved to the left and fell away, sloping steeply down
a hillside, so that they had a sudden, unexpected
view of a whole valley laid out in front of them. Harry
could see a village, undoubtedly Little Hangleton,
nestled between two steep hills, its church and
graveyard clearly visible. Across the valley, set on the
opposite hillside, was a handsome manor house
surrounded by a wide expanse of velvety green lawn. Ogden had broken into a reluctant trot due to the
steep downward slope. Dumbledore lengthened his
stride, and Harry hurried to keep up. He thought
Little Hangleton must be their final destination and
wondered, as he had done on the night they had
found Slughorn, why they had to approach it from
such a distance. He soon discovered that he was
mistaken in thinking that they were going to the
village, however. The lane curved to the right and
when they rounded the corner, it was to see the very
edge of Ogden’s frock coat vanishing through a gap in
the hedge. Dumbledore and Harry followed him onto a narrow
dirt track bordered by higher and wilder hedgerows
than those they had left behind. The path was
crooked, rocky, and potholed, sloping downhill like
the last one, and it seemed to be heading for a patch
of dark trees a little below them. Sure enough, the
track soon opened up at the copse, and Dumbledore
and Harry came to a halt behind Ogden, who had
stopped and drawn his wand. Despite the cloudless sky, the old trees ahead cast
deep, dark, cool shadows, and it was a few seconds
before Harry’s eyes discerned the building half-hidden
amongst the tangle of trunks. It seemed to him a very
strange location to choose for a house, or else an odd
decision to leave the trees growing nearby, blocking
all light and the view of the valley below. He wondered
whether it was inhabited; its walls were mossy and so
many tiles had fallen off the roof that the rafters were
visible in places. Nettles grew all around it, their tips
reaching the windows, which were tiny and thick with
grime. Just as he had concluded that nobody could
possibly live there, however, one of the windows was
thrown open with a clatter, and a thin trickle of steam
or smoke issued from it, as though somebody was
cooking. Ogden moved forward quietly and, it seemed to Harry,
rather cautiously. As the dark shadows of the trees
slid over him, he stopped again, staring at the front
door, to which somebody had nailed a dead snake. Then there was a rustle and a crack, and a man in
rags dropped from the nearest tree, landing on his
feet right in front of Ogden, who leapt backward so
fast he stood on the tails of his frock coat and
stumbled. “ You’re not welcome.” The man standing before them had thick hair so
matted with dirt it could have been any color. Several
of his teeth were missing. His eyes were small and
dark and stared in opposite directions. He might have
looked comical, but he did not; the effect was
frightening, and Harry could not blame Ogden for
backing away several more paces before he spoke. “Er — good morning. I’m from the Ministry of Magic “ You’re not welcome.” “Er — I’m sorry — I don’t understand you,” said
Ogden nervously.
Harry thought Ogden was being extremely dim; the
stranger was making himself very clear in Harry’s
opinion, particularly as he was brandishing a wand in
one hand and a short and rather bloody knife in the
other. “You understand him, I’m sure, Harry?” said
Dumbledore quietly. “Yes, of course,” said Harry, slightly nonplussed. “Why can’t Ogden — ?” But as his eyes found the dead snake on the door
again, he suddenly understood. “He’s speaking Parseltongue?” “Very good,” said Dumbledore, nodding and smiling. The man in rags was now advancing on Ogden, knife
in one hand, wand in the other. “Now, look — ” Ogden began, but too late: There was a
bang, and Ogden was on the ground, clutching his
nose, while a nasty yellowish goo squirted from
between his fingers. “Morfin!” said a loud voice. An elderly man had come hurrying out of the cottage,
banging the door behind him so that the dead snake
swung pathetically. This man was shorter than the
first, and oddly proportioned; his shoulders were very
broad and his arms overlong, which, with his bright
brown eyes, short scrubby hair, and wrinkled face,
gave him the look of a powerful, aged monkey. He
came to a halt beside the man with the knife, who
was now cackling with laughter at the sight of Ogden
on the ground.
“Ministry, is it?” said the older man, looking down at
Ogden. “Correct!” said Ogden angrily, dabbing his face. “And
you, I take it, are Mr. Gaunt?” “S’right,” said Gaunt. “Got you in the face, did he?” “Yes, he did!” snapped Ogden. “Should’ve made your presence known, shouldn’t
you?” said Gaunt aggressively. “This is private
property. Can’t just walk in here and not expect my
son to defend himself.” “Defend himself against what, man?” said Ogden,
clambering back to his feet. “Busybodies. Intruders. Muggles and filth.” Ogden pointed his wand at his own nose, which was
still issuing large amounts of what looked like yellow
pus, and the flow stopped at once. Mr. Gaunt spoke
out of the corner of his mouth to Morfin. “Get in the house. Don’t argue.” This time, ready for it, Harry recognized Parseltongue;
even while he could understand what was being said,
he distinguished the weird hissing noise that was all
Ogden could hear. Morfin seemed to be on the point
of disagreeing, but when his father cast him a
threatening look he changed his mind, lumbering
away to the cottage with an odd rolling gait and
slamming the front door behind him, so that the
snake swung sadly again.
“It’s your son I’m here to see, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden,
as he mopped the last of the pus from the front of his
coat. “That was Morfin, wasn’t it?” “Ar, that was Morfin,” said the old man indifferently.
“Are you pure-blood?” he asked, suddenly aggressive. “That’s neither here nor there,” said Ogden coldly,
and Harry felt his respect for Ogden rise. Apparently
Gaunt felt rather differently. He squinted into Ogden’s
face and muttered, in what was clearly supposed to
be an offensive tone, “Now I come to think about it, I’ve seen noses like yours down in the village.” “I don’t doubt it, if your son’s been let loose on them,”
said Ogden. “Perhaps we could continue this
discussion inside?” “Inside?” “Yes, Mr. Gaunt. I’ve already told you. I’m here about
Morfin. We sent an owl — ” “I’ve no use for owls,” said Gaunt. “I don’t open
letters.” “Then you can hardly complain that you get no
warning of visitors,” said Ogden tartly. “I am here
following a serious breach of Wizarding law, which
occurred here in the early hours of this morning — ” “All right, all right, all right!” bellowed Gaunt. “Come
in the bleeding house, then, and much good it’ll do
you!” The house seemed to contain three tiny rooms. Two
doors led off the main room, which served as kitchen
and living room combined. Morfin was sitting in a
filthy armchair beside the smoking fire, twisting a live
adder between his thick fingers and crooning softly at
it in Parseltongue: Hissy, hissy, little snakey, Slither on the floor, You be good to Morfin
Or hell nail you to the door. There was a scuffling noise in the corner beside the
open window, and Harry realized that there was
somebody else in the room, a girl whose ragged gray
dress was the exact color of the dirty stone wall
behind her. She was standing beside a steaming pot
on a grimy black stove, and was fiddling around with
the shelf of squalid-looking pots and pans above it.
Her hair was lank and dull and she had a plain, pale,
rather heavy face. Her eyes, like her brother’s, stared
in opposite directions. She looked a little cleaner than
the two men, but Harry thought he had never seen a
more defeated-looking person. “M’daughter, Merope,” said Gaunt grudgingly, as
Ogden looked inquiringly toward her. “Good morning,” said Ogden. She did not answer, but with a frightened glance at
her father turned her back on the room and
continued shifting the pots on the shelf behind her. “Well, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, “to get straight to the
point, we have reason to believe that your son, Morfin, performed magic in front of a Muggle late last
night.” There was a deafening clang. Merope had dropped
one of the pots.
“Pick it up\” Gaunt bellowed at her. “That’s it, grub on
the floor like some filthy Muggle, what’s your wand
for, you useless sack of muck?” “Mr. Gaunt, please!” said Ogden in a shocked voice,
as Merope, who had already picked up the pot,
flushed blotchily scarlet, lost her grip on the pot
again, drew her wand shakily from her pocket,
pointed it at the pot, and muttered a hasty, inaudible
spell that caused the pot to shoot across the floor
away from her, hit the opposite wall, and crack in
two. Morfin let out a mad cackle of laughter. Gaunt
screamed, “Mend it, you pointless lump, mend it!” Merope stumbled across the room, but before she had
time to raise her wand, Ogden had lifted his own and
said firmly, “Reparo.” The pot mended itself instantly. Gaunt looked for a moment as though he was going to
shout at Ogden, but seemed to think better of it:
Instead, he jeered at his daughter, “Lucky the nice
man from the Ministry’s here, isn’t it? Perhaps he’ll
take you off my hands, perhaps he doesn’t mind dirty
Squibs. ...” Without looking at anybody or thanking Ogden,
Merope picked up the pot and returned it, hands
trembling, to its shelf. She then stood quite still, her
back against the wall between the filthy window and
the stove, as though she wished for nothing more
than to sink into the stone and vanish. “Mr. Gaunt,” Ogden began again, “as I’ve said: the
reason for my visit — ”
“I heard you the first time!” snapped Gaunt. “And so
what? Morfin gave a Muggle a bit of what was coming
to him — what about it, then?” “Morfin has broken Wizarding law,” said Ogden
sternly. “ ‘Morfin has broken Wizarding law.’ ” Gaunt imitated
Ogden’s voice, making it pompous and singsong.
Morfin cackled again. “He taught a filthy Muggle a
lesson, that’s illegal now, is it?” “Yes,” said Ogden. “I’m afraid it is.” He pulled from an inside pocket a small scroll of
parchment and unrolled it. “What’s that, then, his sentence?” said Gaunt, his
voice rising angrily. “It is a summons to the Ministry for a hearing — ” “Summons! Summons? Who do you think you are,
summoning my son anywhere?” “I’m Head of the Magical Law Enforcement Squad,”
said Ogden. “And you think we’re scum, do you?” screamed
Gaunt, advancing on Ogden now, with a dirty yellow-
nailed finger pointing at his chest. “Scum who’ll come
running when the Ministry tells ’em to? Do you know
who you’re talking to, you filthy little Mudblood, do
you? “I was under the impression that I was speaking to
Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, looking wary, but standing
his ground.
“That’s right!” roared Gaunt. For a moment, Harry
thought Gaunt was making an obscene hand gesture,
but then realized that he was showing Ogden the
ugly, black- stoned ring he was wearing on his middle
finger, waving it before Ogden’s eyes. “See this? See
this? Know what it is? Know where it came from?
Centuries it’s been in our family, that’s how far back
we go, and pure-blood all the way! Know how much
I’ve been offered for this, with the Peverell coat of
arms engraved on the stone?” “I’ve really no idea,” said Ogden, blinking as the ring
sailed within an inch of his nose, “and it’s quite
beside the point, Mr. Gaunt. Your son has committed With a howl of rage, Gaunt ran toward his daughter.
For a split second, Harry thought he was going to
throttle her as his hand flew to her throat; next
moment, he was dragging her toward Ogden by a gold
chain around her neck. “See this?” he bellowed at Ogden, shaking a heavy
gold locket at him, while Merope spluttered and
gasped for breath. “I see it, I see it!” said Ogden hastily. “Slytherin’sl” yelled Gaunt. “Salazar Slytherin’s! We’re
his last living descendants, what do you say to that,
eh?” “Mr. Gaunt, your daughter!” said Ogden in alarm, but
Gaunt had already released Merope; she staggered
away from him, back to her corner, massaging her
neck and gulping for air. “So!” said Gaunt triumphantly, as though he had just
proved a complicated point beyond all possible
dispute. “Don’t you go talking to us as if we’re dirt on
your shoes! Generations of purebloods, wizards all —
more than you can say, I don’t doubt!” And he spat on the floor at Ogden’s feet. Morfin
cackled again. Merope, huddled beside the window,
her head bowed and her face hidden by her lank hair,
said nothing. “Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden doggedly, “I am afraid that
neither your ancestors nor mine have anything to do
with the matter in hand. I am here because of Morfin,
Morfin and the Muggle he accosted late last night. Our information” — he glanced down at his scroll of
parchment — “is that Morfin performed a jinx or hex
on the said Muggle, causing him to erupt in highly
painful hives.” Morfin giggled. “ Be quiet, boy,” snarled Gaunt in Parseltongue, and
Morfin fell silent again. “And so what if he did, then?” Gaunt said defiantly to
Ogden. “I expect you’ve wiped the Muggle ’s filthy face
clean for him, and his memory to boot — ” “That’s hardly the point, is it, Mr. Gaunt?” said
Ogden. “This was an unprovoked attack on a
defenseless — ” “Ar, I had you marked out as a Muggle-lover the
moment I saw you,” sneered Gaunt, and he spat on
the floor again. “This discussion is getting us nowhere,” said Ogden
firmly. “It is clear from your son’s attitude that he
feels no remorse for his actions.” He glanced down at
his scroll of parchment again. “Morfin will attend a
hearing on the fourteenth of September to answer the
charges of using magic in front of a Muggle and
causing harm and distress to that same Mugg — ” Ogden broke off. The jingling, clopping sounds of
horses and loud, laughing voices were drifting in
through the open window. Apparently the winding
lane to the village passed very close to the copse
where the house stood. Gaunt froze, listening, his
eyes wide. Morfin hissed and turned his face toward
the sounds, his expression hungry. Merope raised her
head. Her face, Harry saw, was starkly white. “My God, what an eyesore!” rang out a girl’s voice, as
clearly audible through the open window as if she had
stood in the room beside them. “Couldn’t your father
have that hovel cleared away, Tom?” “It’s not ours,” said a young man’s voice. “Everything
on the other side of the valley belongs to us, but that
cottage belongs to an old tramp called Gaunt, and his
children. The son’s quite mad, you should hear some
of the stories they tell in the village — ” The girl laughed. The jingling, clopping noises were
growing louder and louder. Morfin made to get out of
his armchair. “Keep your seat,” said his father warningly, in
Parseltongue. “Tom,” said the girl’s voice again, now so close they
were clearly right beside the house, “I might be wrong
— but has somebody nailed a snake to that door?” “Good lord, you’re right!” said the man’s voice. “That’ll
be the son, I told you he’s not right in the head. Don’t
look at it, Cecilia, darling.”
The jingling and clopping sounds were now growing
fainter again. “ ‘Darling,’ ” whispered Morfin in Parseltongue,
looking at his sister. “ ‘Darling,’ he called her. So he
wouldn’t have you anyway.” Merope was so white Harry felt sure she was going to
faint. “What’s that?” said Gaunt sharply, also in
Parseltongue, looking from his son to his daughter. “ What did you say, Morfin?” “She likes looking at that Muggle,” said Morfin, a
vicious expression on his face as he stared at his
sister, who now looked terrified. “Always in the
garden when he passes, peering through the hedge at
him, isn’t she? And last night — ” Merope shook her head jerkily, imploringly, but
Morfin went on ruthlessly, “Hanging out of the
window waiting for him to ride home, wasn’t she?” “Hanging out of the window to look at a Muggle?” said
Gaunt quietly. All three of the Gaunts seemed to have forgotten
Ogden, who was looking both bewildered and irritated
at this renewed outbreak of incomprehensible hissing
and rasping. “Is it true?” said Gaunt in a deadly voice, advancing a
step or two toward the terrified girl. “My daughter —
pure-blooded descendant of Salazar Slytherin —
hankering after a filthy, dirt-veined Muggle?” Merope shook her head frantically, pressing herself
into the wall, apparently unable to speak.
“But I got him, FatheA” cackled Morfin. “I got him as
he went by and he didn’t look so pretty with hives all
over him, did he, Merope?” “You disgusting little Squib, you filthy little blood
traitoA.” roared Gaunt, losing control, and his hands
closed around his daughter’s throat. Both Harry and Ogden yelled “No!” at the same time;
Ogden raised his wand and cried, “Relashiol” Gaunt
was thrown backward, away from his daughter; he
tripped over a chair and fell flat on his back. With a
roar of rage, Morfin leapt out of his chair and ran at
Ogden, brandishing his bloody knife and firing hexes
indiscriminately from his wand. Ogden ran for his life. Dumbledore indicated that they
ought to follow and Harry obeyed, Merope ’s screams
echoing in his ears. Ogden hurtled up the path and erupted onto the main
lane, his arms over his head, where he collided with
the glossy chestnut horse ridden by a very handsome,
dark-haired young man. Both he and the pretty girl
riding beside him on a gray horse roared with
laughter at the sight of Ogden, who bounced off the
horse’s flank and set off again, his frock coat flying,
covered from head to foot in dust, running pell-mell
up the lane. “I think that will do, Harry,” said Dumbledore. He
took Harry by the elbow and tugged. Next moment,
they were both soaring weightlessly through
darkness, until they landed squarely on their feet,
back in Dumbledore ’s now twilit office. “What happened to the girl in the cottage?” said Harry
at once, as Dumbledore lit extra lamps with a flick of
his wand. “Merope, or whatever her name was?”
“Oh, she survived,” said Dumbledore, reseating
himself behind his desk and indicating that Harry
should sit down too. “Ogden Apparated back to the
Ministry and returned with reinforcements within
fifteen minutes. Morfin and his father attempted to
fight, but both were overpowered, removed from the
cottage, and subsequently convicted by the
Wizengamot. Morfin, who already had a record of
Muggle attacks, was sentenced to three years in
Azkaban. Marvolo, who had injured several Ministry
employees in addition to Ogden, received six months.” “Marvolo?” Harry repeated wonderingly. “That’s right,” said Dumbledore, smiling in approval. “I am glad to see you’re keeping up.” “That old man was — ?” “Voldemort’s grandfather, yes,” said Dumbledore.
“Marvolo, his son, Morfin, and his daughter, Merope,
were the last of the Gaunts, a very ancient Wizarding
family noted for a vein of instability and violence that
flourished through the generations due to their habit
of marrying their own cousins. Lack of sense coupled
with a great liking for grandeur meant that the family
gold was squandered several generations before
Marvolo was born. He, as you saw, was left in squalor
and poverty, with a very nasty temper, a fantastic
amount of arrogance and pride, and a couple of
family heirlooms that he treasured just as much as
his son, and rather more than his daughter.” “So Merope,” said Harry, leaning forward in his chair
and staring at Dumbledore, “so Merope was ... Sir,
does that mean she was ... Voldemort’s mother?”
“It does,” said Dumbledore. “And it so happens that
we also had a glimpse of Voldemort’s father. I wonder
whether you noticed?” “The Muggle Morfin attacked? The man on the
horse?” “Very good indeed,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Yes,
that was Tom Riddle senior, the handsome Muggle
who used to go riding past the Gaunt cottage and for
whom Merope Gaunt cherished a secret, burning
passion.” “And they ended up married?” Harry said in disbelief,
unable to imagine two people less likely to fall in love. “I think you are forgetting,” said Dumbledore, “that
Merope was a witch. I do not believe that her magical
powers appeared to their best advantage when she
was being terrorized by her father. Once Marvolo and
Morfin were safely in Azkaban, once she was alone
and free for the first time in her life, then, I am sure,
she was able to give full rein to her abilities and to
plot her escape from the desperate life she had led for
eighteen years. “Can you not think of any measure Merope could
have taken to make Tom Riddle forget his Muggle
companion, and fall in love with her instead?” “The Imperius Curse?” Harry suggested. “Or a love
potion?” “Very good. Personally, I am inclined to think that she
used a love potion. I am sure it would have seemed
more romantic to her, and I do not think it would
have been very difficult, some hot day, when Riddle
was riding alone, to persuade him to take a drink of
water. In any case, within a few months of the scene
we have just witnessed, the village of Little Hangleton
enjoyed a tremendous scandal. You can imagine the
gossip it caused when the squire’s son ran off with
the tramp’s daughter, Merope. “But the villagers’ shock was nothing to Marvolo’s. He
returned from Azkaban, expecting to find his
daughter dutifully awaiting his return with a hot meal
ready on his table. Instead, he found a clear inch of
dust and her note of farewell, explaining what she
had done. “From all that I have been able to discover, he never
mentioned her name or existence from that time
forth. The shock of her desertion may have
contributed to his early death — or perhaps he had
simply never learned to feed himself. Azkaban had
greatly weakened Marvolo, and he did not live to see
Morfin return to the cottage.” “And Merope? She ... she died, didn’t she? Wasn’t
Voldemort brought up in an orphanage?” “Yes, indeed,” said Dumbledore. “We must do a
certain amount of guessing here, although I do not
think it is difficult to deduce what happened. You see,
within a few months of their runaway marriage, Tom
Riddle reappeared at the manor house in Little
Hangleton without his wife. The rumor flew around
the neighborhood that he was talking of being
‘hoodwinked’ and ‘taken in.’ What he meant, I am
sure, is that he had been under an enchantment that
had now lifted, though I daresay he did not dare use
those precise words for fear of being thought insane.
When they heard what he was saying, however, the
villagers guessed that Merope had lied to Tom Riddle,
pretending that she was going to have his baby, and
that he had married her for this reason.”
“But she did have his baby.” “But not until a year after they were married. Tom
Riddle left her while she was still pregnant.” “What went wrong?” asked Harry. “Why did the love
potion stop working?” “Again, this is guesswork,” said Dumbledore, “but I
believe that Merope, who was deeply in love with her
husband, could not bear to continue enslaving him by
magical means. I believe that she made the choice to
stop giving him the potion. Perhaps, besotted as she
was, she had convinced herself that he would by now
have fallen in love with her in return. Perhaps she
thought he would stay for the baby’s sake. If so, she
was wrong on both counts. He left her, never saw her
again, and never troubled to discover what became of
his son.” The sky outside was inky black and the lamps in
Dumbledore ’s office seemed to glow more brightly
than before. “I think that will do for tonight, Harry,” said
Dumbledore after a moment or two. “Yes, sir,” said Harry. He got to his feet, but did not leave. “Sir ... is it important to know all this about
Voldemort’s past?” “Very important, I think,” said Dumbledore. “And it ... it’s got something to do with the prophecy?” “It has everything to do with the prophecy.”
“Right,” said Harry, a little confused, but reassured
all the same. He turned to go, then another question occurred to
him, and he turned back again. “Sir, am I allowed to
tell Ron and Hermione everything you’ve told me?” Dumbledore considered him for a moment, then said,
“Yes, I think Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger have
proved themselves trustworthy. But Harry, I am going
to ask you to ask them not to repeat any of this to
anybody else. It would not be a good idea if word got
around how much I know, or suspect, about Lord
Voldemort’s secrets.” “No, sir, I’ll make sure it’s just Ron and Hermione.
Good night.” He turned away again, and was almost at the door
when he saw it. Sitting on one of the little spindle-
legged tables that supported so many frail-looking
silver instruments, was an ugly gold ring set with a
large, cracked, black stone. “Sir,” said Harry, staring at it. “That ring — ” “Yes?” said Dumbledore. “You were wearing it when we visited Professor
Slughorn that night.” “So I was,” Dumbledore agreed. “But isn’t it ... sir, isn’t it the same ring Marvolo
Gaunt showed Ogden?” Dumbledore bowed his head. “The very same.” “But how come — ? Have you always had it?”
“No, I acquired it very recently,” said Dumbledore. “A
few days before I came to fetch you from your aunt
and uncle’s, in fact.” “That would be around the time you injured your
hand, then, sir?” “Around that time, yes, Harry.” Harry hesitated. Dumbledore was smiling. “Sir, how exactly — ?” “Too late, Harry! You shall hear the story another
time. Good night.” “Good night, sir.”  HERMIONE’S HELPING HAND As Hermione had predicted, the sixth years’ free
periods were not the hours of blissful relaxation Ron
had anticipated, but times in which to attempt to
keep up with the vast amount of homework they were
being set. Not only were they studying as though they
had exams every day, but the lessons themselves had
become more demanding than ever before. Harry
barely understood half of what Professor McGonagall
said to them these days; even Hermione had had to
ask her to repeat instructions once or twice.
Incredibly, and to Hermione ’s increasing resentment,
Harry’s best subject had suddenly become Potions,
thanks to the Half-Blood Prince. Nonverbal spells were now expected, not only in
Defense Against the Dark Arts, but in Charms and
Transfiguration too. Harry frequently looked over at
his classmates in the common room or at mealtimes
to see them purple in the face and straining as
though they had overdosed on U-No-Poo; but he knew
that they were really struggling to make spells work  without saying incantations aloud. It was a relief to
get outside into the greenhouses; they were dealing
with more dangerous plants than ever in Herbology,
but at least they were still allowed to swear loudly if
the Venomous Tentacula seized them unexpectedly
from behind. One result of their enormous workload and the frantic
hours of practicing nonverbal spells was that Harry,
Ron, and Hermione had so far been unable to find
time to go and visit Hagrid. He had stopped coming to
meals at the staff table, an ominous sign, and on the
few occasions when they had passed him in the
corridors or out in the grounds, he had mysteriously
failed to notice them or hear their greetings. “We’ve got to go and explain,” said Hermione, looking
up at Hagrid ’s huge empty chair at the staff table the
following Saturday at breakfast. “We’ve got Quidditch tryouts this morning!” said Ron.
“And we’re supposed to be practicing that Aguamenti
Charm from Flitwick! Anyway, explain what? How are
we going to tell him we hated his stupid subject?” “We didn’t hate it!” said Hermione. “Speak for yourself, I haven’t forgotten the skrewts,”
said Ron darkly. “And I’m telling you now, we’ve had a
narrow escape. You didn’t hear him going on about
his gormless brother — we’d have been teaching
Grawp how to tie his shoelaces if we’d stayed.” “I hate not talking to Hagrid,” said Hermione, looking
upset. “Well go down after Quidditch,” Harry assured her. He too was missing Hagrid, although like Ron he
thought that they were better off without Grawp in
their lives. “But trials might take all morning, the
number of people who have applied.” He felt slightly
nervous at confronting the first hurdle of his
Captaincy. “I dunno why the team’s this popular all of
a sudden.” “Oh, come on, Harry,” said Hermione, suddenly
impatient. “It’s not Quidditch that’s popular, it’s you!
You’ve never been more interesting, and frankly,
you’ve never been more fanciable.” Ron gagged on a large piece of kipper. Hermione
spared him one look of disdain before turning back to
Harry. “Everyone knows you’ve been telling the truth now,
don’t they? The whole Wizarding world has had to
admit that you were right about Voldemort being back
and that you really have fought him twice in the last
two years and escaped both times. And now they’re
calling you ‘the Chosen One’ — well, come on, can’t
you see why people are fascinated by you?” Harry was finding the Great Hall very hot all of a
sudden, even though the ceiling still looked cold and
rainy. “And you’ve been through all that persecution from
the Ministry when they were trying to make out you
were unstable and a liar. You can still see the marks
on the back of your hand where that evil woman
made you write with your own blood, but you stuck to
your story anyway. ...” “You can still see where those brains got hold of me in
the Ministry, look,” said Ron, shaking back his
sleeves.
“And it doesn’t hurt that you’ve grown about a foot
over the summer either,” Hermione finished, ignoring
Ron. “I’m tall,” said Ron inconsequentially. The post owls arrived, swooping down through rain-
flecked windows, scattering everyone with droplets of
water. Most people were receiving more post than
usual; anxious parents were keen to hear from their
children and to reassure them, in turn, that all was
well at home. Harry had received no mail since the
start of term; his only regular correspondent was now
dead and although he had hoped that Lupin might
write occasionally, he had so far been disappointed.
He was very surprised, therefore, to see the snowy
white Hedwig circling amongst all the brown and gray
owls. She landed in front of him carrying a large,
square package. A moment later, an identical package
landed in front of Ron, crushing beneath it his
minuscule and exhausted owl, Pigwidgeon. “Ha!” said Harry, unwrapping the parcel to reveal a
new copy of Advanced Potion-Making, fresh from
Flourish and Blotts. “Oh good,” said Hermione, delighted. “Now you can
give that graffitied copy back.” “Are you mad?” said Harry. “I’m keeping it! Look, I’ve
thought it out — ” He pulled the old copy of Advanced Potion-Making out
of his bag and tapped the cover with his wand,
muttering, “Diffindol” The cover fell off. He did the
same thing with the brand-new book (Hermione
looked scandalized). He then swapped the covers,
tapped each, and said, “Reparo\”
There sat the Prince’s copy, disguised as a new book,
and there sat the fresh copy from Flourish and Blotts,
looking thoroughly secondhand. “I’ll give Slughorn back the new one, he can’t
complain, it cost nine Galleons.” Hermione pressed her lips together, looking angry
and disapproving, but was distracted by a third owl
landing in front of her carrying that day’s copy of the
Daily Prophet. She unfolded it hastily and scanned
the front page. “Anyone we know dead?” asked Ron in a determinedly
casual voice; he posed the same question every time
Hermione opened her paper. “No, but there have been more dementor attacks,”
said Hermione. “And an arrest.” “Excellent, who?” said Harry, thinking of Bellatrix
Lestrange. “Stan Shunpike,” said Hermione. “What?” said Harry, startled. “ ‘Stanley Shunpike , conductor on the popular
Wizarding conveyance the Knight Bus, has been
arrested on suspicion of Death Eater activity. Mr.
Shunpike, , was taken into custody late last night
after a raid on his Clapham home ...’ ” “Stan Shunpike, a Death Eater?” said Harry,
remembering the spotty youth he had first met three
years before. “No way!” “He might have been put under the Imperius Curse,”
said Ron reasonably. “You never can tell.”
“It doesn’t look like it,” said Hermione, who was still
reading. “It says here he was arrested after he was
overheard talking about the Death Eaters’ secret
plans in a pub.” She looked up with a troubled
expression on her face. “If he was under the Imperius
Curse, he’d hardly stand around gossiping about
their plans, would he?” “It sounds like he was trying to make out he knew
more than he did,” said Ron. “Isn’t he the one who
claimed he was going to become Minister of Magic
when he was trying to chat up those veela?” “Yeah, that’s him,” said Harry. “I dunno what they’re
playing at, taking Stan seriously.” “They probably want to look as though they’re doing
something,” said Hermione, frowning. “People are
terrified — you know the Patil twins’ parents want
them to go home? And Eloise Midgen has already
been withdrawn. Her father picked her up last night.” “What!” said Ron, goggling at Hermione. “But
Hogwarts is safer than their homes, bound to be!
We’ve got Aurors, and all those extra protective spells,
and we’ve got Dumbledore!” “I don’t think we’ve got him all the time,” said
Hermione very quietly, glancing toward the staff table
over the top of the Prophet “Haven’t you noticed? His
seat’s been empty as often as Hagrid’s this past
week.” Harry and Ron looked up at the staff table. The
headmaster’s chair was indeed empty. Now Harry
came to think of it, he had not seen Dumbledore
since their private lesson a week ago.
“I think he’s left the school to do something with the
Order,” said Hermione in a low voice. “I mean ... it’s
all looking serious, isn’t it? Harry and Ron did not answer, but Harry knew that
they were all thinking the same thing. There had been
a horrible incident the day before, when Hannah
Abbott had been taken out of Herbology to be told her
mother had been found dead. They had not seen
Hannah since. When they left the Gryffindor table five minutes later
to head down to the Quidditch pitch, they passed
Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil. Remembering what
Hermione had said about the Patil twins’ parents
wanting them to leave Hogwarts, Harry was
unsurprised to see that the two best friends were
whispering together, looking distressed. What did
surprise him was that when Ron drew level with
them, Parvati suddenly nudged Lavender, who looked
around and gave Ron a wide smile. Ron blinked at
her, then returned the smile uncertainly. His walk
instantly became something more like a strut. Harry
resisted the temptation to laugh, remembering that
Ron had refrained from doing so after Malfoy had
broken Harry’s nose; Hermione, however, looked cold
and distant all the way down to the stadium through
the cool, misty drizzle, and departed to find a place in
the stands without wishing Ron good luck. As Harry had expected, the trials took most of the
morning. Half of Gryffindor House seemed to have
turned up, from first years who were nervously
clutching a selection of the dreadful old school
brooms, to seventh years who towered over the rest,
looking coolly intimidating. The latter included a
large, wiry-haired boy Harry recognized immediately
from the Hogwarts Express.
“We met on the train, in old Sluggy’s compartment,”
he said confidently, stepping out of the crowd to
shake Harry’s hand. “Cormac McLaggen, Keeper.” “You didn’t try out last year, did you?” asked Harry,
taking note of the breadth of McLaggen and thinking
that he would probably block all three goal hoops
without even moving. “I was in the hospital wing when they held the trials,”
said McLaggen, with something of a swagger. “Ate a
pound of doxy eggs for a bet.” “Right,” said Harry. “Well ... if you wait over there ...” He pointed over to the edge of the pitch, close to
where Hermione was sitting. He thought he saw a
flicker of annoyance pass over McLaggen’s face and
wondered whether McLaggen expected preferential
treatment because they were both “old Sluggy’s”
favorites. Harry decided to start with a basic test, asking all
applicants for the team to divide into groups of ten
and fly once around the pitch. This was a good
decision: The first ten was made up of first years and
it could not have been plainer that they had hardly
ever flown before. Only one boy managed to remain
airborne for more than a few seconds, and he was so
surprised he promptly crashed into one of the goal
posts. The second group was comprised of ten of the silliest
girls Harry had ever encountered, who, when he blew
his whistle, merely fell about giggling and clutching
one another. Romilda Vane was amongst them. When
he told them to leave the pitch, they did so quite
cheerfully and went to sit in the stands to heckle
everyone else.
The third group had a pileup halfway around the
pitch. Most of the fourth group had come without
broomsticks. The fifth group were Hufflepuffs. “If there’s anyone else here who’s not from
Gryffindor,” roared Harry, who was starting to get
seriously annoyed, “leave now, please!” There was a pause, then a couple of little Ravenclaws
went sprinting off the pitch, snorting with laughter. After two hours, many complaints, and several
tantrums, one involving a crashed Comet Two Sixty
and several broken teeth, Harry had found himself
three Chasers: Katie Bell, returned to the team after
an excellent trial; a new find called Demelza Robins,
who was particularly good at dodging Bludgers; and
Ginny Weasley, who had outflown all the competition
and scored seventeen goals to boot. Pleased though
he was with his choices, Harry had also shouted
himself hoarse at the many complainers and was now
enduring a similar battle with the rejected Beaters. “That’s my final decision and if you don’t get out of
the way for the Keepers I’ll hex you,” he bellowed. Neither of his chosen Beaters had the old brilliance of
Fred and George, but he was still reasonably pleased
with them: Jimmy Peakes, a short but broad-chested
third-year boy who had managed to raise a lump the
size of an egg on the back of Harry’s head with a
ferociously hit Bludger, and Ritchie Coote, who looked
weedy but aimed well. They now joined Katie, Demelza, and Ginny in the stands to watch the
selection of their last team member. Harry had deliberately left the trial of the Keepers
until last, hoping for an emptier stadium and less
pressure on all concerned. Unfortunately, however, all
the rejected players and a number of people who had
come down to watch after a lengthy breakfast had
joined the crowd by now, so that it was larger than
ever. As each Keeper flew up to the goal hoops, the
crowd roared and jeered in equal measure. Harry
glanced over at Ron, who had always had a problem
with nerves; Harry had hoped that winning their final
match last term might have cured it, but apparently
not: Ron was a delicate shade of green. None of the first five applicants saved more than two
goals apiece. To Harry’s great disappointment, Cormac McLaggen saved four penalties out of five. On
the last one, however, he shot off in completely the
wrong direction; the crowd laughed and booed and
McLaggen returned to the ground grinding his teeth. Ron looked ready to pass out as he mounted his
Cleansweep Eleven. “Good luck!” cried a voice from
the stands. Harry looked around, expecting to see
Hermione, but it was Lavender Brown. He would have
quite liked to have hidden his face in his hands, as
she did a moment later, but thought that as the
Captain he ought to show slightly more grit, and so
turned to watch Ron do his trial. Yet he need not have worried: Ron saved one, two,
three, four, five penalties in a row. Delighted, and
resisting joining in the cheers of the crowd with
difficulty, Harry turned to McLaggen to tell him that,
most unfortunately, Ron had beaten him, only to find
McLaggen’s red face inches from his own. He stepped
back hastily. “His sister didn’t really try,” said McLaggen
menacingly. There was a vein pulsing in his temple
like the one Harry had often admired in Uncle
Vernon’s. “She gave him an easy save.”
“Rubbish,” said Harry coldly. “That was the one he
nearly missed.” McLaggen took a step nearer Harry, who stood his
ground this time. “Give me another go.” “No,” said Harry. “You’ve had your go. You saved four.
Ron saved five. Ron’s Keeper, he won it fair and
square. Get out of my way.” He thought for a moment that McLaggen might punch
him, but he contented himself with an ugly grimace
and stormed away, growling what sounded like
threats to thin air. Harry turned around to find his new team beaming at
him. “Well done,” he croaked. “You flew really well — ” “You did brilliantly, Ron!” This time it really was Hermione running toward
them from the stands; Harry saw Lavender walking
off the pitch, arm in arm with Parvati, a rather
grumpy expression on her face. Ron looked extremely
pleased with himself and even taller than usual as he
grinned at the team and at Hermione. After fixing the time of their first full practice for the
following Thursday, Harry, Ron, and Hermione bade
good-bye to the rest of the team and headed off
toward Hagrid’s. A watery sun was trying to break
through the clouds now and it had stopped drizzling
at last. Harry felt extremely hungry; he hoped there
would be something to eat at Hagrid’s.
“I thought I was going to miss that fourth penalty,”
Ron was saying happily. “Tricky shot from Demelza,
did you see, had a bit of spin on it — ” “Yes, yes, you were magnificent,” said Hermione,
looking amused. “I was better than that McLaggen anyway,” said Ron
in a highly satisfied voice. “Did you see him
lumbering off in the wrong direction on his fifth?
Looked like he’d been Confunded. ...” To Harry’s surprise, Hermione turned a very deep
shade of pink at these words. Ron noticed nothing; he
was too busy describing each of his other penalties in
loving detail. The great gray hippogriff, Buckbeak, was tethered in
front of Hagrid’s cabin. He clicked his razor-sharp
beak at their approach and turned his huge head
toward them. “Oh dear,” said Hermione nervously. “He’s still a bit
scary, isn’t he?” “Come off it, you’ve ridden him, haven’t you?” said
Ron. Harry stepped forward and bowed low to the
hippogriff without breaking eye contact or blinking.
After a few seconds, Buckbeak sank into a bow too. “How are you?” Harry asked him in a low voice,
moving forward to stroke the feathery head. “Missing
him? But you’re okay here with Hagrid, aren’t you?” “Oi!” said a loud voice.
Hagrid had come striding around the corner of his
cabin wearing a large flowery apron and carrying a
sack of potatoes. His enormous boarhound, Fang,
was at his heels; Fang gave a booming bark and
bounded forward. “Git away from him! Hell have yer fingers — oh. It’s
yeh lot.” Fang was jumping up at Hermione and Ron,
attempting to lick their ears. Hagrid stood and looked
at them all for a split second, then turned and strode
into his cabin, slamming the door behind him. “Oh dear!” said Hermione, looking stricken. “Don’t worry about it,” said Harry grimly. He walked
over to the door and knocked loudly. “Hagrid! Open up, we want to talk to you!” There was no sound from within. “If you don’t open the door, we’ll blast it open!” Harry
said, pulling out his wand. “Harry!” said Hermione, sounding shocked. “You can’t
possibly — ” “Yeah, I can!” said Harry. “Stand back — ” But before he could say anything else, the door flew
open again as Harry had known it would, and there
stood Hagrid, glowering down at him and looking,
despite the flowery apron, positively alarming. “I’m a teacher!” he roared at Harry. “A teacher, Potter!
How dare yeh threaten ter break down my door!”
‘Tm sorry, sir,” said Harry, emphasizing the last word
as he stowed his wand inside his robes. Hagrid looked stunned. “Since when have yeh called
me ‘sir’?” “Since when have you called me ‘Potter’?” “Oh, very clever,” growled Hagrid. “Very amusin’.
That’s me outsmarted, innit? All righ’, come in then,
yeh ungrateful little ...” Mumbling darkly, he stood back to let them pass.
Hermione scurried in after Harry, looking rather
frightened. “Well?” said Hagrid grumpily, as Harry, Ron, and
Hermione sat down around his enormous wooden
table, Fang laying his head immediately upon Harry’s
knee and drooling all over his robes. “What’s this?
Feelin’ sorry for me? Reckon I’m lonely or summat?” “No,” said Harry at once. “We wanted to see you.” “We’ve missed you!” said Hermione tremulously. “Missed me, have yeh?” snorted Hagrid. “Yeah. Righ’.” He stomped around, brewing up tea in his enormous
copper kettle, muttering all the while. Finally he
slammed down three bucket-sized mugs of
mahogany-brown tea in front of them and a plate of
his rock cakes. Harry was hungry enough even for
Hagrid’s cooking, and took one at once. “Hagrid,” said Hermione timidly, when he joined them
at the table and started peeling his potatoes with a
brutality that suggested that each tuber had done
him a great personal wrong, “we really wanted to
carry on with Care of Magical Creatures, you know.” Hagrid gave another great snort. Harry rather thought
some bogeys landed on the potatoes, and was
inwardly thankful that they were not staying for
dinner. “We did!” said Hermione. “But none of us could fit it
into our schedules!” “Yeah. Righ’,” said Hagrid again. There was a funny squelching sound and they all
looked around: Hermione let out a tiny shriek, and
Ron leapt out of his seat and hurried around the table
away from the large barrel standing in the corner that
they had only just noticed. It was full of what looked
like foot-long maggots, slimy, white, and writhing. “What are they, Hagrid?” asked Harry, trying to sound
interested rather than revolted, but putting down his
rock cake all the same. “Jus’ giant grubs,” said Hagrid. “And they grow into ... ?” said Ron, looking
apprehensive. “They won’ grow inter nuthin’,” said Hagrid. “I got ’em
ter feed ter Aragog.” And without warning, he burst into tears. “Hagrid!” cried Hermione, leaping up, hurrying
around the table the long way to avoid the barrel of
maggots, and putting an arm around his shaking
shoulders. “What is it?”
“It’s ... him ...” gulped Hagrid, his beetle-black eyes
streaming as he mopped his face with his apron. “It’s
... Aragog. ... I think he’s dyin’. ... He got ill over the
summer an’ he’s not gettin’ better. ... I don’ know
what I’ll do if he ... if he ... We’ve bin tergether so
long. ...” Hermione patted Hagrid’s shoulder, looking at a
complete loss for anything to say. Harry knew how
she felt. He had known Hagrid to present a vicious
baby dragon with a teddy bear, seen him croon over
giant scorpions with suckers and stingers, attempt to
reason with his brutal giant of a half-brother, but this
was perhaps the most incomprehensible of all his
monster fancies: the gigantic talking spider, Aragog,
who dwelled deep in the Forbidden Forest and which
he and Ron had only narrowly escaped four years
previously. “Is there — is there anything we can do?” Hermione
asked, ignoring Ron’s frantic grimaces and head-
shakings. “I don’ think there is, Hermione,” choked Hagrid,
attempting to stem the flood of his tears. “See, the
rest o’ the tribe ... Aragog’s family ... they’re gettin’ a
bit funny now he’s ill ... bit restive ...” “Yeah, I think we saw a bit of that side of them,” said
Ron in an undertone. "... I don’ reckon it’d be safe fer anyone but me ter go
near the colony at the mo’,” Hagrid finished, blowing
his nose hard on his apron and looking up. “But
thanks fer offerin’, Hermione. ... It means a lot. ...” After that, the atmosphere lightened considerably, for
although neither Harry nor Ron had shown any
inclination to go and feed giant grubs to a murderous,
gargantuan spider, Hagrid seemed to take it for
granted that they would have liked to have done and
became his usual self once more. “Ar, I always knew yeh’d find it hard ter squeeze me
inter yer timetables,” he said gruffly, pouring them
more tea. “Even if yeh applied fer Time-Turners — ” “We couldn’t have done,” said Hermione. “We
smashed the entire stock of Ministry Time-Turners
when we were there last summer. It was in the Daily
Prophet.” “Ar, well then,” said Hagrid. “There’s no way yeh
could’ve done it. ... I’m sorry I’ve bin — yeh know —
I’ve jus’ bin worried abou’ Aragog ... an’ I did wonder
whether, if Professor Grubbly-Plank had bin teachin’
yeh At which all three of them stated categorically and
untruthfully that Professor Grubbly-Plank, who had
substituted for Hagrid a few times, was a dreadful
teacher, with the result that by the time Hagrid waved
them off the premises at dusk, he looked quite
cheerful. “I’m starving,” said Harry, once the door had closed
behind them and they were hurrying through the
dark and deserted grounds; he had abandoned the
rock cake after an ominous cracking noise from one
of his back teeth. “And I’ve got that detention with
Snape tonight, I haven’t got much time for dinner. ...” As they came into the castle they spotted Cormac
McLaggen entering the Great Hall. It took him two
attempts to get through the doors; he ricocheted off
the frame on the first attempt. Ron merely guffawed
gloatingly and strode off into the Hall after him, but
Harry caught Hermione ’s arm and held her back.
“What?” said Hermione defensively. “If you ask me,” said Harry quietly, “McLaggen looks
like he was Confunded this morning. And he was
standing right in front of where you were sitting.” Hermione blushed. “Oh, all right then, I did it,” she whispered. “But you
should have heard the way he was talking about Ron
and Ginny! Anyway, he’s got a nasty temper, you saw
how he reacted when he didn’t get in — you wouldn’t
have wanted someone like that on the team.” “No,” said Harry. “No, I suppose that’s true. But
wasn’t that dishonest, Hermione? I mean, you’re a
prefect, aren’t you?” “Oh, be quiet,” she snapped, as he smirked. “What are you two doing?” demanded Ron,
reappearing in the doorway to the Great Hall and
looking suspicious. “Nothing,” said Harry and Hermione together, and
they hurried after Ron. The smell of roast beef made
Harry’s stomach ache with hunger, but they had
barely taken three steps toward the Gryffindor table
when Professor Slughorn appeared in front of them,
blocking their path. “Harry, Harry, just the man I was hoping to see!” he
boomed genially, twiddling the ends of his walrus
mustache and puffing out his enormous belly. “I was
hoping to catch you before dinner! What do you say to
a spot of supper tonight in my rooms instead? We’re
having a little party, just a few rising stars, I’ve got
McLaggen coming and Zabini, the charming Melinda
Bobbin — I don’t know whether you know her? Her
family owns a large chain of apothecaries — and, of
course, I hope very much that Miss Granger will favor
me by coming too.” Slughorn made Hermione a little bow as he finished
speaking. It was as though Ron was not present;
Slughorn did not so much as look at him. “I can’t come, Professor,” said Harry at once. “I’ve got
a detention with Professor Snape.” “Oh dear!” said Slughorn, his face falling comically.
“Dear, dear, I was counting on you, Harry! Well, now,
I’ll just have to have a word with Severus and explain
the situation. I’m sure I’ll be able to persuade him to
postpone your detention. Yes, I’ll see you both later!” He bustled away out of the Hall. “He’s got no chance of persuading Snape,” said Harry,
the moment Slughorn was out of earshot. “This
detention’s already been postponed once; Snape did it
for Dumbledore, but he won’t do it for anyone else.” “Oh, I wish you could come, I don’t want to go on my
own!” said Hermione anxiously; Harry knew that she
was thinking about McLaggen. “I doubt you’ll be alone, Ginny’ll probably be invited,”
Of course, if she had known anything, she
would have told Flitwick or Dumbledore, who had
surely asked her the same question. He had shaken
his head and made to turn away when she spoke in a
low voice. “I stole the diadem from my mother.” “You — you did what?” “ I stole the diadem,” repeated Helena Ravenclaw in a
whisper. “I sought to make myself cleverer, more
important than my mother. I ran away with it.” He did not know how he had managed to gain her
confidence, and did not ask; he simply listened, hard,
as she went on: “My mother, they say, never admitted that the diadem
was gone, but pretended that she had it still. She
concealed her loss, my dreadful betrayal, even from
the other founders of Hogwarts. “Then my mother fell ill — fatally ill. In spite of my
perfidy, she was desperate to see me one more time.
She sent a man who had long loved me, though I  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
spurned his advances, to find me. She knew that he
would not rest until he had done so.” Harry waited. She drew a deep breath and threw back
her head. “He tracked me to the forest where I was hiding. When I refused to return with him, he became violent.
The Baron was always a hot-tempered man. Furious
at my refusal, jealous of my freedom, he stabbed me.” “The Baron? You mean — ?” “The Bloody Baron, yes,” said the Gray Lady, and she
lifted aside the cloak she wore to reveal a single dark
wound in her white chest. “When he saw what he had
done, he was overcome with remorse. He took the
weapon that had claimed my life, and used it to kill
himself. All these centuries later, he wears his chains
as an act of penitence ... as he should,” she added
bitterly. “And . . . and the diadem?” “It remained where I had hidden it when I heard the
Baron blundering through the forest toward me.
Concealed inside a hollow tree. “A hollow tree?” repeated Harry. “What tree? Where
was this?” “A forest in Albania. A lonely place I thought was far
beyond my mother’s reach.” “Albania,” repeated Harry. Sense was emerging
miraculously from confusion, and now he understood
why she was telling him what she had denied
Dumbledore and Flitwick. “You’ve already told
someone this story, haven’t you? Another student?” Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
She closed her eyes and nodded. “I had ... no idea. . . . He was . . . flattering. He seemed
to ... to understand ... to sympathize. ...” Yes, Harry thought, Tom Riddle would certainly have
understood Helena Ravenclaw’s desire to possess
fabulous objects to which she had little right. “Well, you weren’t the first person Riddle wormed
things out of,” Harry muttered. “He could be
charming when he wanted. ...” So Voldemort had managed to wheedle the location of
the lost diadem out of the Gray Lady. He had traveled
to that far-flung forest and retrieved the diadem from
its hiding place, perhaps as soon as he left Hogwarts,
before he even started work at Borgin and Burkes. And wouldn’t those secluded Albanian woods have
seemed an excellent refuge when, so much later,
Voldemort had needed a place to lie low, undisturbed,
for ten long years? But the diadem, once it became his precious Horcrux,
had not been left in that lowly tree. ... No, the diadem
had been returned secretly to its true home, and
Voldemort must have put it there — “ — the night he asked for a job!” said Harry, finishing
his thought. “I beg your pardon?” “He hid the diadem in the castle, the night he asked
Dumbledore to let him teach!” said Harry. Saying it
out loud enabled him to make sense of it all. “He
must’ve hidden the diadem on his way up to, or down
from, Dumbledore ’s office! But it was still worth trying Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
to get the job — then he might’ve got the chance to
nick Gryffindor’s sword as well — thank you, thanks!” Harry left her floating there, looking utterly
bewildered. As he rounded the corner back into the
entrance hall, he checked his watch. It was five
minutes until midnight, and though he now knew
what the last Horcrux was, he was no closer to
discovering where it was. ... Generations of students had failed to find the diadem;
that suggested that it was not in Ravenclaw Tower —
but if not there, where? What hiding place had Tom
Riddle discovered inside Hogwarts Castle, that he
believed would remain secret forever? Lost in desperate speculation, Harry turned a corner,
but he had taken only a few steps down the new
corridor when the window to his left broke open with
a deafening, shattering crash. As he leapt aside, a
gigantic body flew in through the window and hit the
opposite wall. Something large and furry detached
itself, whimpering, from the new arrival and flung
itself at Harry. “Hagrid!” Harry bellowed, fighting off Fang the
boarhound’s attentions as the enormous bearded
figure clambered to his feet. “What the — ?” “Harry, yer here! Yer here\” Hagrid stooped down, bestowed upon Harry a cursory
and rib-cracking hug, then ran back to the shattered
window. “Good boy, Grawpy!” he bellowed through the hole in
the window. “I’ll see yer in a moment, there’s a good
lad!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Beyond Hagrid, out in the dark night, Harry saw
bursts of light in the distance and heard a weird,
keening scream. He looked down at his watch: It was
midnight. The battle had begun. “Blimey, Harry,” panted Hagrid, “this is it, eh? Time
ter fight?” “Hagrid, where have you come from?” “Heard You-Know-Who from up in our cave,” said
Hagrid grimly. “Voice carried, didn’ it? Yeh got till
midnight ter gimme Potter.’ Knew yeh mus’ be here,
knew what mus’ be happenin’. Get down, Fang. So we
come ter join in, me an’ Grawpy an’ Fang. Smashed
our way through the boundary by the forest, Grawpy
was carryin’ us, Fang an’ me. Told him ter let me
down at the castle, so he shoved me through the
window, bless him. Not exac’ly what I meant, bu’ —
where’s Ron an’ Hermione?” “That,” said Harry, “is a really good question. Come
on.” They hurried together along the corridor, Fang
lolloping beside them. Harry could hear movement
through the corridors all around: running footsteps,
shouts; through the windows, he could see more
flashes of light in the dark grounds. “Where’re we goin’?” puffed Hagrid, pounding along at
Harry’s heels, making the floorboards quake. “I dunno exactly,” said Harry, making another
random turn, “but Ron and Hermione must be
around here somewhere. ...” The first casualties of the battle were already strewn
across the passage ahead: The two stone gargoyles  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
that usually guarded the entrance to the staffroom
had been smashed apart by a jinx that had sailed
through another broken window. Their remains
stirred feebly on the floor, and as Harry leapt over one
of their disembodied heads, it moaned faintly, “Oh,
don’t mind me ... I’ll just lie here and crumble. ...” Its ugly stone face made Harry think suddenly of the
marble bust of Rowena Ravenclaw at Xenophilius’s
house, wearing that mad headdress — and then of
the statue in Ravenclaw Tower, with the stone diadem
upon her white curls. ... And as he reached the end of the passage, the
memory of a third stone effigy came back to him: that
of an ugly old warlock, onto whose head Harry
himself had placed a wig and a battered old tiara. The
shock shot through Harry with the heat of firewhisky,
and he nearly stumbled. He knew, at last, where the Horcrux sat waiting for
him. ... Tom Riddle, who confided in no one and operated
alone, might have been arrogant enough to assume
that he, and only he, had penetrated the deepest
mysteries of Hogwarts Castle. Of course, Dumbledore
and Flitwick, those model pupils, had never set foot in
that particular place, but he, Harry, had strayed off
the beaten track in his time at school — here at last
was a secret he and Voldemort knew, that
Dumbledore had never discovered — He was roused by Professor Sprout, who was
thundering past followed by Neville and half a dozen
others, all of them wearing earmuffs and carrying
what appeared to be large potted plants.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Mandrakes!” Neville bellowed at Harry over his
shoulder as he ran. “Going to lob them over the walls
— they won’t like this!” Harry knew now where to go: He sped off, with Hagrid
and Fang galloping behind him. They passed portrait
after portrait, and the painted figures raced alongside
them, wizards and witches in ruffs and breeches, in
armor and cloaks, cramming themselves into each
others’ canvases, screaming news from other parts of
the castle. As they reached the end of this corridor,
the whole castle shook, and Harry knew, as a gigantic
vase blew off its plinth with explosive force, that it
was in the grip of enchantments more sinister than
those of the teachers and the Order. “It’s all righ’, Fang — it’s all righ’!” yelled Hagrid, but
the great boarhound had taken flight as slivers of
china flew like shrapnel through the air, and Hagrid
pounded off after the terrified dog, leaving Harry
alone. He forged on through the trembling passages, his
wand at the ready, and for the length of one corridor
the little painted knight, Sir Cadogan, rushed from
painting to painting beside him, clanking along in his
armor, screaming encouragement, his fat little pony
cantering behind him. “Braggarts and rogues, dogs and scoundrels, drive
them out, Harry Potter, see them off!” Harry hurtled around a corner and found Fred and a
small knot of students, including Lee Jordan and
Hannah Abbott, standing beside another empty
plinth, whose statue had concealed a secret
passageway. Their wands were drawn and they were
listening at the concealed hole.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Nice night for it!” Fred shouted as the castle quaked
again, and Harry sprinted by, elated and terrified in
equal measure. Along yet another corridor he dashed,
and then there were owls everywhere, and Mrs. Norris
was hissing and trying to bat them with her paws, no
doubt to return them to their proper place. ... “Potter!” Aberforth Dumbledore stood blocking the corridor
ahead, his wand held ready. “I’ve had hundreds of kids thundering through my
pub, Potter!” “I know, we’re evacuating,” Harry said, “Voldemort’s “ — attacking because they haven’t handed you over,
yeah,” said Aberforth, “I’m not deaf, the whole of
Hogsmeade heard him. And it never occurred to any
of you to keep a few Slytherins hostage? There are
kids of Death Eaters you’ve just sent to safety.
Wouldn’t it have been a bit smarter to keep ’em here?” “It wouldn’t stop Voldemort,” said Harry, “and your
brother would never have done it.” Aberforth grunted and tore away in the opposite
direction. Your brother would never have done it. ... Well, it was
the truth, Harry thought as he ran on again;
Dumbledore, who had defended Snape for so long,
would never have held students ransom. ... And then he skidded around a final corner and with a
yell of mingled relief and fury he saw them: Ron and
Hermione, both with their arms full of large, curved,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
dirty yellow objects, Ron with a broomstick under his
arm. “Where the hell have you been?” Harry shouted. “Chamber of Secrets,” said Ron. “Chamber — what?” said Harry, coming to an
unsteady halt before them. “It was Ron, all Ron’s idea!” said Hermione
breathlessly. “Wasn’t it absolutely brilliant? There we
were, after you left, and I said to Ron, even if we find
the other one, how are we going to get rid of it? We
still hadn’t got rid of the cup! And then he thought of
it! The basilisk!” “What the — ?” “Something to get rid of Horcruxes,” said Ron simply. Harry’s eyes dropped to the objects clutched in Ron
and Hermione’s arms: great curved fangs, torn, he
now realized, from the skull of a dead basilisk. “But how did you get in there?” he asked, staring
from the fangs to Ron. “You need to speak
Parseltongue!” “He did!” whispered Hermione. “Show him, Ron!” Ron made a horrible strangled hissing noise. “It’s what you did to open the locket,” he told Harry
apologetically. “I had to have a few goes to get it right,
but,” he shrugged modestly, “we got there in the end.” “He was amazing.” said Hermione. “Amazing!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“So ...” Harry was struggling to keep up. “So ...” “So we’re another Horcrux down,” said Ron, and from
under his jacket he pulled the mangled remains of
Hufflepuff’s cup. “Hermione stabbed it. Thought she
should. She hasn’t had the pleasure yet.” “Genius!” yelled Harry. “It was nothing,” said Ron, though he looked
delighted with himself. “So what’s new with you?” As he said it, there was an explosion from overhead:
All three of them looked up as dust fell from the
ceiling and they heard a distant scream. “I know what the diadem looks like, and I know where
it is,” said Harry, talking fast. “He hid it exactly where
I hid my old Potions book, where everyone’s been
hiding stuff for centuries. He thought he was the only
one to find it. Come on.” As the walls trembled again, he led the other two back
through the concealed entrance and down the
staircase into the Room of Requirement. It was empty
except for three women: Ginny, Tonks, and an elderly
witch wearing a moth-eaten hat, whom Harry
recognized immediately as Neville’s grandmother. “Ah, Potter,” she said crisply as if she had been
waiting for him. “You can tell us what’s going on.” “Is everyone okay?” said Ginny and Tonks together. “ ’S far as we know,” said Harry. “Are there still people
in the passage to the Hog’s Head?” He knew that the room would not be able to
transform while there were still users inside it.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I was the last to come through,” said Mrs.
Longbottom. “I sealed it, I think it unwise to leave it
open now Aberforth has left his pub. Have you seen
my grandson?” “He’s fighting,” said Harry. “Naturally,” said the old lady proudly. “Excuse me, I
must go and assist him.” With surprising speed she trotted off toward the stone
steps. Harry looked at Tonks. “I thought you were supposed to be with Teddy at
your mother’s?” “I couldn’t stand not knowing — ” Tonks looked
anguished. “She’ll look after him — have you seen
Remus?” “He was planning to lead a group of fighters into the
grounds — ” Without another word, Tonks sped off. “Ginny,” said Harry, “I’m sorry, but we need you to
leave too. Just for a bit. Then you can come back in.” Ginny looked simply delighted to leave her sanctuary. “And then you can come back in!” he shouted after
her as she ran up the steps after Tonks. “ You’ve got to
come back ini” “Hang on a moment!” said Ron sharply. “We’ve
forgotten someone!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Who?” asked Hermione. “The house-elves, they’ll all be down in the kitchen,
won’t they?” “You mean we ought to get them fighting?” asked
Harry. “No,” said Ron seriously, “I mean we should tell them
to get out. We don’t want any more Dobbies, do we?
We can’t order them to die for us — ” There was a clatter as the basilisk fangs cascaded out
of Hermione ’s arms. Running at Ron, she flung them
around his neck and kissed him full on the mouth.
Ron threw away the fangs and broomstick he was
holding and responded with such enthusiasm that he
lifted Hermione off her feet. “Is this the moment?” Harry asked weakly, and when
nothing happened except that Ron and Hermione
gripped each other still more firmly and swayed on
the spot, he raised his voice. “! There’s a war going
on here!” Ron and Hermione broke apart, their arms still
around each other. “I know, mate,” said Ron, who looked as though he
had recently been hit on the back of the head with a
Bludger, “so it’s now or never, isn’t it?” “Never mind that, what about the Horcrux?” Harry
shouted. “D’you think you could just — just hold it in
until we’ve got the diadem?” “Yeah — right — sorry — ” said Ron, and he and
Hermione set about gathering up fangs, both pink in
the face.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
It was clear, as the three of them stepped back into
the corridor upstairs, that in the minutes that they
had spent in the Room of Requirement the situation
within the castle had deteriorated severely: The walls
and ceiling were shaking worse than ever; dust filled
the air, and through the nearest window, Harry saw
bursts of green and red light so close to the foot of the
castle that he knew the Death Eaters must be very
near to entering the place. Looking down, Harry saw
Grawp the giant meandering past, swinging what
looked like a stone gargoyle torn from the roof and
roaring his displeasure. “Let’s hope he steps on some of them!” said Ron as
more screams echoed from close by. “As long as it’s not any of our lot!” said a voice: Harry
turned and saw Ginny and Tonks, both with their
wands drawn at the next window, which was missing
several panes. Even as he watched, Ginny sent a well-
aimed jinx into a crowd of fighters below. “Good girl!” roared a figure running through the dust
toward them, and Harry saw Aberforth again, his gray
hair flying as he led a small group of students past.
“They look like they might be breaching the north
battlements, they’ve brought giants of their own!” “Have you seen Remus?” Tonks called after him. “He was dueling Dolohov,” shouted Aberforth, “haven’t seen him since! “Tonks,” said Ginny, “Tonks, I’m sure he’s okay — ”
But Tonks had run off into the dust after Aberforth.
Ginny turned, helpless, to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“They’ll be all right,” said Harry, though he knew they
were empty words. “Ginny, we’ll be back in a moment,
just keep out of the way, keep safe — come on!” he
said to Ron and Hermione, and they ran back to the
stretch of wall beyond which the Room of
Requirement was waiting to do the bidding of the next
entrant. I need the place where everything is hidden, Harry
begged of it inside his head, and the door materialized
on their third run past. The furor of the battle died the moment they crossed
the threshold and closed the door behind them: All
was silent. They were in a place the size of a cathedral
with the appearance of a city, its towering walls built
of objects hidden by thousands of long-gone students. “And he never realized anyone could get in?” said
Ron, his voice echoing in the silence. “He thought he was the only one,” said Harry. “Too
bad for him I’ve had to hide stuff in my time ... this
way,” he added, “I think it’s down here. ...” He passed the stuffed troll and the Vanishing Cabinet
Draco Malfoy had mended last year with such
disastrous consequences, then hesitated, looking up
and down aisles of junk; he could not remember
where to go next. ... “ Accio Diadem).” cried Hermione in desperation, but
nothing flew through the air toward them. It seemed
that, like the vault at Gringotts, the room would not
yield its hidden objects that easily. “Let’s split up,” Harry told the other two. “Look for a
stone bust of an old man wearing a wig and a tiara!  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
It’s standing on a cupboard and it’s definitely
somewhere near here. ...” They sped off up adjacent aisles; Harry could hear the
others’ footsteps echoing through the towering piles of
junk, of bottles, hats, crates, chairs, books, weapons,
broomsticks, bats. ... “Somewhere near here,” Harry muttered to himself.
“Somewhere ... somewhere ...” Deeper and deeper into the labyrinth he went, looking
for objects he recognized from his one previous trip
into the room. His breath was loud in his ears, and
then his very soul seemed to shiver: There it was,
right ahead, the blistered old cupboard in which he
had hidden his old Potions book, and on top of it, the
pockmarked stone warlock wearing a dusty old wig
and what looked like an ancient, discolored tiara. He had already stretched out his hand, though he
remained ten feet away, when a voice behind him
said, “Hold it, Potter.” He skidded to a halt and turned around. Crabbe and
Goyle were standing behind him, shoulder to
shoulder, wands pointing right at Harry. Through the
small space between their leering faces he saw Draco
Malfoy. “That’s my wand you’re holding, Potter,” said Malfoy,
pointing his own through the gap between Crabbe
and Goyle. “Not anymore,” panted Harry, tightening his grip on
the hawthorn wand. “Winners, keepers, Malfoy. Who’s
lent you theirs?” “My mother,” said Draco.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry laughed, though there was nothing very
humorous about the situation. He could not hear Ron
or Hermione anymore. They seemed to have run out
of earshot, searching for the diadem. “So how come you three aren’t with Voldemort?”
asked Harry. “We’re gonna be rewarded,” said Crabbe: His voice
was surprisingly soft for such an enormous person;
Harry had hardly ever heard him speak before. Crabbe was smiling like a small child promised a
large bag of sweets. “We ’ung back, Potter. We decided
not to go. Decided to bring you to ’im.” “Good plan,” said Harry in mock admiration. He could
not believe that he was this close, and was going to be
thwarted by Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle. He began
edging slowly backward toward the place where the
Horcrux sat lopsided upon the bust. If he could just
get his hands on it before the fight broke out . . . “So how did you get in here?” he asked, trying to
distract them. “I virtually lived in the Room of Hidden Things all last
year,” said Malfoy, his voice brittle. “I know how to get
in.” “We was hiding in the corridor outside,” grunted
Goyle. “We can do Diss-lusion Charms now! And
then,” his face split into a gormless grin, “you turned
up right in front of us and said you was looking for a
die-dum! What’s a die-dum?” “Harry?” Ron’s voice echoed suddenly from the other
side of the wall to Harry’s right. “Are you talking to
someone?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
With a whiplike movement, Crabbe pointed his wand
at the fifty-foot mountain of old furniture, of broken
trunks, of old books and robes and unidentifiable
junk, and shouted, “DescendoV’ The wall began to totter, then the top third crumbled
into the aisle next door where Ron stood. “Ron!” Harry bellowed, as somewhere out of sight
Hermione screamed, and Harry heard innumerable
objects crashing to the floor on the other side of the
destabilized wall: He pointed his wand at the rampart,
cried, “Finite!” and it steadied. “No!” shouted Malfoy, staying Crabbe’s arm as the
latter made to repeat his spell. “If you wreck the room
you might bury this diadem thing!” “What’s that matter?” said Crabbe, tugging himself
free. “It’s Potter the Dark Lord wants, who cares
about a die-dum?” “Potter came in here to get it,” said Malfoy with ill-
disguised impatience at the slow-wittedness of his
colleagues, “so that must mean — ” “ ‘Must mean?” Crabbe turned on Malfoy with
undisguised ferocity. “Who cares what you think? I
don’t take your orders no more, Draco. You an’ your
dad are finished.” “Harry?” shouted Ron again, from the other side of
the junk wall. “What’s going on?” “Harry?” mimicked Crabbe. “What’s going — no, Potter! Cruciol” Harry had lunged for the tiara; Crabbe’s curse missed
him but hit the stone bust, which flew into the air;  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
the diadem soared upward and then dropped out of
sight in the mass of objects on which the bust had
rested. “STOP!” Malfoy shouted at Crabbe, his voice echoing
through the enormous room. “The Dark Lord wants
him alive — ” “So? I’m not killing him, am I?” yelled Crabbe,
throwing off Malfoy’s restraining arm. “But if I can, I
will, the Dark Lord wants him dead anyway, what’s
thediff— ?” A jet of scarlet light shot past Harry by inches:
Hermione had run around the corner behind him and
sent a Stunning Spell straight at Crabbe ’s head. It
only missed because Malfoy pulled him out of the
way. “It’s that Mudblood! Avada Kedavral” Harry saw Hermione dive aside, and his fury that
Crabbe had aimed to kill wiped all else from his mind.
He shot a Stunning Spell at Crabbe, who lurched out
of the way, knocking Malfoy’s wand out of his hand; it
rolled out of sight beneath a mountain of broken
furniture and boxes. “Don’t kill him! DONT KILL HIM!” Malfoy yelled at
Crabbe and Goyle, who were both aiming at Harry:
Their split second’s hesitation was all Harry needed. “ Expelliarmusl” Goyle ’s wand flew out of his hand and disappeared
into the bulwark of objects beside him; Goyle leapt
foolishly on the spot, trying to retrieve it; Malfoy
jumped out of range of Hermione ’s second Stunning
Spell, and Ron, appearing suddenly at the end of the Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
aisle, shot a full Body-Bind Curse at Crabbe, which
narrowly missed. Crabbe wheeled around and screamed, “Avada
KedavraY’ again. Ron leapt out of sight to avoid the jet
of green light. The wandless Malfoy cowered behind a
three-legged wardrobe as Hermione charged toward
them, hitting Goyle with a Stunning Spell as she
came. “It’s somewhere here!” Harry yelled at her, pointing at
the pile of junk into which the old tiara had fallen.
“Look for it while I go and help R — ” “HARRY!” she screamed. A roaring, billowing noise behind him gave him a
moment’s warning. He turned and saw both Ron and
Crabbe running as hard as they could up the aisle
toward them. “Like it hot, scum?” roared Crabbe as he ran. But he seemed to have no control over what he had
done. Flames of abnormal size were pursuing them,
licking up the sides of the junk bulwarks, which were
crumbling to soot at their touch. “Aguamenti\” Harry bawled, but the jet of water that
soared from the tip of his wand evaporated in the air. “RUN!” Malfoy grabbed the Stunned Goyle and dragged him
along; Crabbe outstripped all of them, now looking
terrified; Harry, Ron, and Hermione pelted along in
his wake, and the fire pursued them. It was not
normal fire; Crabbe had used a curse of which Harry
had no knowledge: As they turned a corner the flames Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
chased them as though they were alive, sentient,
intent upon killing them. Now the fire was mutating,
forming a gigantic pack of fiery beasts: Flaming
serpents, chimaeras, and dragons rose and fell and
rose again, and the detritus of centuries on which
they were feeding was thrown up in the air into their
fanged mouths, tossed high on clawed feet, before
being consumed by the inferno. Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had vanished from view:
Harry, Ron, and Hermione stopped dead; the fiery
monsters were circling them, drawing closer and
closer, claws and horns and tails lashed, and the heat
was solid as a wall around them. “What can we do?” Hermione screamed over the
deafening roars of the fire. “What can we do?” “Here!” Harry seized a pair of heavy-looking broomsticks from
the nearest pile of junk and threw one to Ron, who
pulled Hermione onto it behind him. Harry swung his
leg over the second broom and, with hard kicks to the
ground, they soared up into the air, missing by feet
the horned beak of a flaming raptor that snapped its
jaws at them. The smoke and heat were becoming
overwhelming: Below them the cursed fire was
consuming the contraband of generations of hunted
students, the guilty outcomes of a thousand banned
experiments, the secrets of the countless souls who
had sought refuge in the room. Harry could not see a
trace of Malfoy, Crabbe, or Goyle anywhere: He
swooped as low as he dared over the marauding
monsters of flame to try to find them, but there was
nothing but fire: What a terrible way to die. ... He had
never wanted this. ...  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Harry, let’s get out, let’s get out!” bellowed Ron,
though it was impossible to see where the door was
through the black smoke. And then Harry heard a thin, piteous human scream
from amidst the terrible commotion, the thunder of
devouring flame. “It’s — too — dangerous — !” Ron yelled, but Harry
wheeled in the air. His glasses giving his eyes some
small protection from the smoke, he raked the
firestorm below, seeking a sign of life, a limb or a face
that was not yet charred like wood. ... And he saw them: Malfoy with his arms around the
unconscious Goyle, the pair of them perched on a
fragile tower of charred desks, and Harry dived. Malfoy saw him coming and raised one arm, but even
as Harry grasped it he knew at once that it was no
good: Goyle was too heavy and Malfoy ’s hand, covered
in sweat, slid instantly out of Harry’s — “IF WE DIE FOR THEM, I’LL KILL YOU, HARRY!”
roared Ron’s voice, and, as a great flaming chimaera
bore down upon them, he and Hermione dragged
Goyle onto their broom and rose, rolling and pitching,
into the air once more as Malfoy clambered up behind
Harry. “The door, get to the door, the door!” screamed Malfoy
in Harry’s ear, and Harry sped up, following Ron,
Hermione, and Goyle through the billowing black
smoke, hardly able to breathe: and all around them
the last few objects unburned by the devouring flames
were flung into the air, as the creatures of the cursed
fire cast them high in celebration: cups and shields, a
sparkling necklace, and an old, discolored tiara —  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ What are you doing, what are you doing, the door’s
that way\” screamed Malfoy, but Harry made a
hairpin swerve and dived. The diadem seemed to fall
in slow motion, turning and glittering as it dropped
toward the maw of a yawning serpent, and then he
had it, caught it around his wrist — Harry swerved again as the serpent lunged at him; he
soared upward and straight toward the place where,
he prayed, the door stood open: Ron, Hermione, and
Goyle had vanished; Malfoy was screaming and
holding Harry so tightly it hurt. Then, through the
smoke, Harry saw a rectangular patch on the wall
and steered the broom at it, and moments later clean
air filled his lungs and they collided with the wall in
the corridor beyond. Malfoy fell off the broom and lay facedown, gasping,
coughing, and retching. Harry rolled over and sat up:
The door to the Room of Requirement had vanished,
and Ron and Hermione sat panting on the floor beside
Goyle, who was still unconscious. “C-Crabbe,” choked Malfoy as soon as he could
speak. “C-Crabbe ...” “He’s dead,” said Ron harshly. There was silence, apart from panting and coughing.
Then a number of huge bangs shook the castle, and a
great cavalcade of transparent figures galloped past
on horses, their heads screaming with bloodlust
under their arms. Harry staggered to his feet when
the Headless Hunt had passed and looked around: The battle was still going on all around him. He could
hear more screams than those of the retreating
ghosts. Panic flared within him.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Where’s Ginny?” he said sharply. “She was here. She
was supposed to be going back into the Room of
Requirement.” “Blimey, d’you reckon it’ll still work after that fire?”
asked Ron, but he too got to his feet, rubbing his
chest and looking left and right. “Shall we split up
and look — ?” “No,” said Hermione, getting to her feet too. Malfoy
and Goyle remained slumped hopelessly on the
corridor floor; neither of them had wands. “Let’s stick
together. I say we go — Harry, what’s that on your
arm?” “What? Oh yeah — ” He pulled the diadem from his wrist and held it up. It
was still hot, blackened with soot, but as he looked at
it closely he was just able to make out the tiny words
etched upon it: WIT BEYOND MEASURE IS MAN’S
GREATEST TREASURE. A bloodlike substance, dark and tarry, seemed to be
leaking from the diadem. Suddenly Harry felt the
thing vibrate violently, then break apart in his hands,
and as it did so, he thought he heard the faintest,
most distant scream of pain, echoing not from the
grounds or the castle, but from the thing that had
just fragmented in his fingers. “It must have been Fiendfyre!” whimpered Hermione,
her eyes on the broken pieces. “Sorry?” “Fiendfyre — cursed fire — it’s one of the substances
that destroy Horcruxes, but I would never, ever have  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
dared use it, it’s so dangerous — how did Crabbe
know how to — ?” “Must’ve learned from the Carrows,” said Harry
grimly. “Shame he wasn’t concentrating when they
mentioned how to stop it, really,” said Ron, whose
hair, like Hermione’s, was singed, and whose face was
blackened. “If he hadn’t tried to kill us all, I’d be quite
sorry he was dead.” “But don’t you realize?” whispered Hermione. “This
means, if we can just get the snake — ” But she broke off as yells and shouts and the
unmistakable noises of dueling filled the corridor.
Harry looked around and his heart seemed to fail:
Death Eaters had penetrated Hogwarts. Fred and
Percy had just backed into view, both of them dueling
masked and hooded men. Harry, Ron, and Hermione ran forward to help: Jets of
light flew in every direction and the man dueling
Percy backed off, fast: Then his hood slipped and they
saw a high forehead and streaked hair — “Hello, Minister!” bellowed Percy, sending a neat jinx
straight at Thicknesse, who dropped his wand and
clawed at the front of his robes, apparently in awful
discomfort. “Did I mention I’m resigning?” “You’re joking, Perce!” shouted Fred as the Death
Eater he was battling collapsed under the weight of
three separate Stunning Spells. Thicknesse had fallen
to the ground with tiny spikes erupting all over him;
he seemed to be turning into some form of sea urchin.
Fred looked at Percy with glee.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You actually are joking, Perce. ... I don’t think I’ve
heard you joke since you were — ” The air exploded. They had been grouped together,
Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and Percy, the two
Death Eaters at their feet, one Stunned, the other
Transfigured; and in that fragment of a moment,
when danger seemed temporarily at bay, the world
was rent apart. Harry felt himself flying through the
air, and all he could do was hold as tightly as possible
to that thin stick of wood that was his one and only
weapon, and shield his head in his arms: He heard
the screams and yells of his companions without a
hope of knowing what had happened to them — And then the world resolved itself into pain and
semidarkness: He was half buried in the wreckage of
a corridor that had been subjected to a terrible
attack. Cold air told him that the side of the castle
had been blown away, and hot stickiness on his
cheek told him that he was bleeding copiously. Then
he heard a terrible cry that pulled at his insides, that
expressed agony of a kind neither flame nor curse
could cause, and he stood up, swaying, more
frightened than he had been that day, more
frightened, perhaps, than he had been in his life. ... And Hermione was struggling to her feet in the
wreckage, and three redheaded men were grouped on
the ground where the wall had blasted apart. Harry
grabbed Hermione ’s hand as they staggered and
stumbled over stone and wood. “No — no — no!” someone was shouting. “No! Fred!
No!” And Percy was shaking his brother, and Ron was
kneeling beside them, and Fred’s eyes stared without  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
seeing, the ghost of his last laugh still etched upon
his face.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE ELDER WAND The world had ended, so why had the battle not
ceased, the castle fallen silent in horror, and every
combatant laid down their arms? Harry’s mind was in
free fall, spinning out of control, unable to grasp the
impossibility, because Fred Weasley could not be
dead, the evidence of all his senses must be lying — And then a body fell past the hole blown into the side
of the school, and curses flew in at them from the
darkness, hitting the wall behind their heads. “Get down!” Harry shouted, as more curses flew
through the night: He and Ron had both grabbed
Hermione and pulled her to the floor, but Percy lay
across Fred’s body, shielding it from further harm,
and when Harry shouted, “Percy, come on, we’ve got
to move!” he shook his head. “Percy!” Harry saw tear tracks streaking the grime
coating Ron’s face as he seized his elder brother’s
shoulders and pulled, but Percy would not budge.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling “Percy, you can’t do anything for him! We’re going to Hermione screamed, and Harry, turning, did not need
to ask why. A monstrous spider the size of a small car
was trying to climb through the huge hole in the wall:
One of Aragog’s descendants had joined the fight. Ron and Harry shouted together; their spells collided
and the monster was blown backward, its legs jerking
horribly, and vanished into the darkness. “It brought friends!” Harry called to the others,
glancing over the edge of the castle through the hole
in the wall the curses had blasted: More giant spiders
were climbing the side of the building, liberated from
the Forbidden Forest, into which the Death Eaters
must have penetrated. Harry fired Stunning Spells
down upon them, knocking the lead monster into its
fellows, so that they rolled back down the building
and out of sight. Then more curses came soaring over
Harry’s head, so close he felt the force of them blow
his hair. “Let’s move, NOW!” Pushing Hermione ahead of him with Ron, Harry
stooped to seize Fred’s body under the armpits. Percy,
realizing what Harry was trying to do, stopped
clinging to the body and helped; together, crouching
low to avoid the curses flying at them from the
grounds, they hauled Fred out of the way. “Here,” said Harry, and they placed him in a niche
where a suit of armor had stood earlier. He could not
bear to look at Fred a second longer than he had to,
and after making sure that the body was well hidden,
he took off after Ron and Hermione. Malfoy and Goyle
had vanished, but at the end of the corridor, which Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
was now full of dust and falling masonry, glass long
gone from the windows, he saw many people running
backward and forward, whether friends or foes he
could not tell. Rounding the corner, Percy let out a
bull-like roar: “ROOKWOOD!” and sprinted off in the
direction of a tall man, who was pursuing a couple of
students. “Harry, in here!” Hermione screamed. She had pulled Ron behind a tapestry: They seemed
to be wrestling together, and for one mad second
Harry thought that they were embracing again; then
he saw that Hermione was trying to restrain Ron, to
stop him running after Percy. “Listen to me — LISTEN, ROM” “I wanna help — I wanna kill Death Eaters — ” His face was contorted, smeared with dust and
smoke, and he was shaking with rage and grief. “Ron, we’re the only ones who can end it! Please —
Ron — we need the snake, we’ve got to kill the snake!”
said Hermione. But Harry knew how Ron felt: Pursuing another
Horcrux could not bring the satisfaction of revenge;
he too wanted to fight, to punish them, the people
who had killed Fred, and he wanted to find the other
Weasleys, and above all make sure, make quite sure,
that Ginny was not — but he could not permit that
idea to form in his mind — “We will fight!” Hermione said. “We’ll have to, to reach
the snake! But let’s not lose sight now of what we’re
supposed to be d-doing! We’re the only ones who can
end it!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
She was crying too, and she wiped her face on her
torn and singed sleeve as she spoke, but she took
great heaving breaths to calm herself as, still keeping
a tight hold on Ron, she turned to Harry. “You need to find out where Voldemort is, because
hell have the snake with him, won’t he? Do it, Harry
— look inside him!” Why was it so easy? Because his scar had been
burning for hours, yearning to show him Voldemort’s
thoughts? He closed his eyes on her command, and at
once, the screams and the bangs and all the
discordant sounds of the battle were drowned until
they became distant, as though he stood far, far away
from them. ... He was standing in the middle of a desolate but
strangely familiar room, with peeling paper on the
walls and all the windows boarded except for one. The
sounds of the assault on the castle were muffled and
distant. The single unblocked window revealed
distant bursts of light where the castle stood, but
inside the room it was dark except for a solitary oil
lamp. He was rolling his wand between his fingers, watching
it, his thoughts on the room in the castle, the secret
room only he had ever found, the room, like the
Chamber, that you had to be clever and cunning and
inquisitive to discover. . . . He was confident that the
boy would not find the diadem . . . although
Dumbledore’s puppet had come much farther than he
had ever expected . . . too far. . . . “My Lord,” said a voice, desperate and cracked. He
turned: There was Lucius Malfoy sitting in the
darkest corner, ragged and still bearing the marks of
the punishment he had received after the boy’s last  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
escape. One of his eyes remained closed and puffy.
“My Lord ... please ... my son ...” “If your son is dead, Lucius, it is not my fault. He did
not come and join me, like the rest of the Slytherins.
Perhaps he has decided to befriend Harry Potter?” “No — never,” whispered Malfoy. “You must hope not.” “Aren’t — aren’t you afraid, my Lord, that Potter
might die at another hand but yours?” asked Malfoy,
his voice shaking. “Wouldn’t it be ... forgive me ...
more prudent to call off this battle, enter the castle,
and seek him y-yourself?” “Do not pretend, Lucius. You wish the battle to cease
so that you can discover what has happened to your
son. And I do not need to seek Potter. Before the night
is out, Potter will have come to find me.” Voldemort dropped his gaze once more to the wand in
his fingers. It troubled him ... and those things that
troubled Lord Voldemort needed to be rearranged. ... “Go and fetch Snape.” “Snape, m-my Lord?” “Snape. Now. I need him. There is a — service — I
require from him. Go.” Frightened, stumbling a little through the gloom,
Lucius left the room. Voldemort continued to stand
there, twirling the wand between his fingers, staring
at it.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“It is the only way, Nagini,” he whispered, and he
looked around, and there was the great thick snake,
now suspended in midair, twisting gracefully within
the enchanted, protected space he had made for her,
a starry, transparent sphere somewhere between
glittering cage and tank. With a gasp, Harry pulled back and opened his eyes;
at the same moment his ears were assaulted with the
screeches and cries, the smashes and bangs of battle. “He’s in the Shrieking Shack. The snake’s with him,
it’s got some sort of magical protection around it. He’s
just sent Lucius Malfoy to find Snape.” “Voldemort’s sitting in the Shrieking Shack?” said
Hermione, outraged. “He’s not — he’s not even
fighting?” “He doesn’t think he needs to fight,” said Harry. “He
thinks I’m going to go to him.” “But why?” “He knows I’m after Horcruxes — he’s keeping Nagini
close beside him — obviously I’m going to have to go
to him to get near the thing — ” “Right,” said Ron, squaring his shoulders. “So you
can’t go, that’s what he wants, what he’s expecting.
You stay here and look after Hermione, and I’ll go and
get it — ” Harry cut across Ron. “You two stay here, I’ll go under the Cloak and I’ll be
back as soon as I — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“No,” said Hermione, “it makes much more sense if I
take the Cloak and — ” “Don’t even think about it,” Ron snarled at her. Before Hermione could get farther than “Ron, I’m just
as capable — ” the tapestry at the top of the staircase
on which they stood was ripped open. “POTTER!” Two masked Death Eaters stood there, but even
before their wands were fully raised, Hermione
shouted, “Glisseo\” The stairs beneath their feet flattened into a chute
and she, Harry, and Ron hurtled down it, unable to
control their speed but so fast that the Death Eaters’
Stunning Spells flew far over their heads. They shot
through the concealing tapestry at the bottom and
spun onto the floor, hitting the opposite wall. “Duro\” cried Hermione, pointing her wand at the
tapestry, and there were two loud, sickening crunches
as the tapestry turned to stone and the Death Eaters
pursuing them crumpled against it. “Get back!” shouted Ron, and he, Harry, and
Hermione flattened themselves against a door as a
herd of galloping desks thundered past, shepherded
by a sprinting Professor McGonagall. She appeared
not to notice them: Her hair had come down and
there was a gash on her cheek. As she turned the
corner, they heard her scream, “CHARGE!” “Harry, you get the Cloak on,” said Hermione. “Never
mind us — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
But he threw it over all three of them; large though
they were, he doubted anyone would see their
disembodied feet through the dust that clogged the
air, the falling stone, the shimmer of spells. They ran down the next staircase and found
themselves in a corridor full of duelers. The portraits
on either side of the fighters were crammed with
figures screaming advice and encouragement, while
Death Eaters, both masked and unmasked, dueled
students and teachers. Dean had won himself a
wand, for he was face-to-face with Dolohov, Parvati
with Travers. Harry, Ron, and Hermione raised their
wands at once, ready to strike, but the duelers were
weaving and darting around so much that there was a
strong likelihood of hurting one of their own side if
they cast curses. Even as they stood braced, looking
for the opportunity to act, there came a great
“Wheeeeeeeeeeee\” and, looking up, Harry saw Peeves
zooming over them, dropping Snargaluff pods down
onto the Death Eaters, whose heads were suddenly
engulfed in wriggling green tubers like fat worms. “Argh!” A fistful of tubers had hit the Cloak over Ron’s head;
the slimy green roots were suspended improbably in
midair as Ron tried to shake them loose. “Someone’s invisible there!” shouted a masked Death
Eater, pointing. Dean made the most of the Death Eater’s momentary
distraction, knocking him out with a Stunning Spell;
Dolohov attempted to retaliate and Parvati shot a
Body-Bind Curse at him. “LET’S GO!” Harry yelled, and he, Ron, and Hermione
gathered the Cloak tightly around themselves and  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
pelted, heads down, through the midst of the fighters,
slipping a little in pools of Snargaluff juice, toward the
top of the marble staircase into the entrance hall. “I’m Draco Malfoy, I’m Draco, I’m on your side!” Draco was on the upper landing, pleading with
another masked Death Eater. Harry Stunned the
Death Eater as they passed: Malfoy looked around,
beaming, for his savior, and Ron punched him from
under the Cloak. Malfoy fell backward on top of the
Death Eater, his mouth bleeding, utterly bemused. “And that’s the second time we’ve saved your life
tonight, you two-faced bastard!” Ron yelled. There were more duelers all over the stairs and in the
hall, Death Eaters everywhere Harry looked: Yaxley,
close to the front doors, in combat with Flitwick, a
masked Death Eater dueling Kingsley right beside
them. Students ran in every direction, some carrying
or dragging injured friends. Harry directed a Stunning
Spell toward the masked Death Eater; it missed but
nearly hit Neville, who had emerged from nowhere
brandishing armfuls of Venomous Tentacula, which
looped itself happily around the nearest Death Eater
and began reeling him in. Harry, Ron, and Hermione sped down the marble
staircase: Glass shattered to their left, and the
Slytherin hourglass that had recorded House points
spilled its emeralds everywhere, so that people slipped
and staggered as they ran. Two bodies fell from the
balcony overhead as they reached the ground, and a
gray blur that Harry took for an animal sped four-
legged across the hall to sink its teeth into one of the
fallen.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“NO!” shrieked Hermione, and with a deafening blast
from her wand, Fenrir Greyback was thrown
backward from the feebly stirring body of Lavender
Brown. He hit the marble banisters and struggled to
return to his feet. Then, with a bright white flash and
a crack, a crystal ball fell on top of his head, and he
crumpled to the ground and did not move. “I have more!” shrieked Professor Trelawney from over
the banisters. “More for any who want them! Here — ” And with a movement like a tennis serve, she heaved
another enormous crystal sphere from her bag, waved
her wand through the air, and caused the ball to
speed across the hall and smash through a window.
At the same moment, the heavy wooden front doors
burst open, and more of the gigantic spiders forced
their way into the entrance hall. Screams of terror rent the air: The fighters scattered,
Death Eaters and Hogwartians alike, and red and
green jets of light flew into the midst of the oncoming
monsters, which shuddered and reared, more
terrifying than ever. “How do we get out?” yelled Ron over all the
screaming, but before either Harry or Hermione could
answer they were bowled aside: Hagrid had come
thundering down the stairs, brandishing his flowery
pink umbrella. “Don’t hurt ’em, don’t hurt ’em!” he yelled. “HAGRID, NO!” Harry forgot everything else: He sprinted out from
under the Cloak, running bent double to avoid the
curses illuminating the whole hall.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“HAGRID, COME BACK!” But he was not even halfway to Hagrid when he saw it
happen: Hagrid vanished amongst the spiders, and
with a great scurrying, a foul swarming movement,
they retreated under the onslaught of spells, Hagrid
buried in their midst. “HAGRID!” Harry heard someone calling his own name, whether
friend or foe he did not care: He was sprinting down
the front steps into the dark grounds, and the spiders
were swarming away with their prey, and he could see
nothing of Hagrid at all. “HAGRID!” He thought he could make out an enormous arm
waving from the midst of the spider swarm, but as he
made to chase after them, his way was impeded by a
monumental foot, which swung down out of the
darkness and made the ground on which he stood
shudder. He looked up: A giant stood before him,
twenty feet high, its head hidden in shadow, nothing
but its treelike, hairy shins illuminated by light from
the castle doors. With one brutal, fluid movement, it
smashed a massive fist through an upper window,
and glass rained down upon Harry, forcing him back
under the shelter of the doorway. “Oh my — !” shrieked Hermione, as she and Ron
caught up with Harry and gazed upward at the giant
now trying to seize people through the window above. “DONT!” Ron yelled, grabbing Hermione’s hand as
she raised her wand. “Stun him and hell crush half
the castle — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“HAGGER?” Grawp came lurching around the corner of the castle;
only now did Harry realize that Grawp was, indeed,
an undersized giant. The gargantuan monster trying
to crush people on the upper floors looked around
and let out a roar. The stone steps trembled as he
stomped toward his smaller kin, and Grawp ’s
lopsided mouth fell open, showing yellow, half-brick-
sized teeth; and then they launched themselves at
each other with the savagery of lions. “RUN!” Harry roared; the night was full of hideous
yells and blows as the giants wrestled, and he seized
Hermione’s hand and tore down the steps into the
grounds, Ron bringing up the rear. Harry had not lost
hope of finding and saving Hagrid; he ran so fast that
they were halfway toward the forest before they were
brought up short again. The air around them had frozen: Harry’s breath
caught and solidified in his chest. Shapes moved out
in the darkness, swirling figures of concentrated
blackness, moving in a great wave toward the castle,
their faces hooded and their breath rattling. . . . Ron and Hermione closed in beside him as the
sounds of fighting behind them grew suddenly muted,
deadened, because a silence only dementors could
bring was falling thickly through the night, and Fred
was gone, and Hagrid was surely dying or already
dead. ... “Come on, Harry!” said Hermione’s voice from a very
long way away. “Patronuses, Harry, come on!” He raised his wand, but a dull hopelessness was
spreading through him: How many more lay dead  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
that he did not yet know about; he felt as though his
soul had already half left his body. . . . “HARRY, COME ON!” screamed Hermione. A hundred dementors were advancing, gliding toward them, sucking their way closer to Harry’s despair,
which was like a promise of a feast. ... He saw Ron’s silver terrier burst into the air, flicker
feebly, and expire; he saw Hermione’s otter twist in
midair and fade; and his own wand trembled in his
hand, and he almost welcomed the oncoming
oblivion, the promise of nothing, of no feeling. . . . And then a silver hare, a boar, and a fox soared past
Harry, Ron, and Hermione’s heads: The dementors
fell back before the creatures’ approach. Three more
people had arrived out of the darkness to stand
beside them, their wands outstretched, continuing to
cast their Patronuses: Luna, Ernie, and Seamus. “That’s right,” said Luna encouragingly, as if they
were back in the Room of Requirement and this was
simply spell practice for the D.A. “That’s right, Harry
... come on, think of something happy. ...” “Something happy?” he said, his voice cracked. “We’re all still here,” she whispered, “we’re still
fighting. Come on, now. ...” There was a silver spark, then a wavering light, and then, with the greatest effort it had ever cost him, the
stag burst from the end of Harry’s wand. It cantered
forward, and now the dementors scattered in earnest,
and immediately the night was mild again, but the
sounds of the surrounding battle were loud in his
ears.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Can’t thank you enough,” said Ron shakily, turning
to Luna, Ernie, and Seamus, “you just saved — ” With a roar and an earth-quaking tremor, another
giant came lurching out of the darkness from the
direction of the forest, brandishing a club taller than
any of them. “RUN!” Harry shouted again, but the others needed
no telling: They all scattered, and not a second too
soon, for next moment the creature’s vast foot had
fallen exactly where they had been standing. Harry
looked round: Ron and Hermione were following him,
but the other three had vanished back into the battle. “Let’s get out of range!” yelled Ron as the giant swung
its club again and its bellows echoed through the
night, across the grounds where bursts of red and
green light continued to illuminate the darkness. “The Whomping Willow,” said Harry, “go!” Somehow he walled it all up in his mind, crammed it
into a small space into which he could not look now:
Thoughts of Fred and Hagrid, and his terror for all the
people he loved, scattered in and outside the castle,
must all wait, because they had to run, had to reach
the snake and Voldemort, because that was, as
Hermione said, the only way to end it — He sprinted, half believing he could outdistance death
itself, ignoring the jets of light flying in the darkness
all around him, and the sound of the lake crashing
like the sea, and the creaking of the Forbidden Forest
though the night was windless; through grounds that
seemed themselves to have risen in rebellion, he ran
faster than he had ever moved in his life, and it was
he who saw the great tree first, the Willow that  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
protected the secret at its roots with whiplike,
slashing branches. Panting and gasping, Harry slowed down, skirting the
Willow’s swiping branches, peering through the
darkness toward its thick trunk, trying to see the
single knot in the bark of the old tree that would
paralyze it. Ron and Hermione caught up, Hermione
so out of breath she could not speak. “How — how’re we going to get in?” panted Ron. “I can
— see the place — if we just had — Crookshanks
again — ” “Crookshanks?” wheezed Hermione, bent double,
clutching her chest. “Are you a wizard, or what?” “Oh — right — yeah — ” Ron looked around, then directed his wand at a twig
on the ground and said, “Wingardium Leviosal” The
twig flew up from the ground, spun through the air as
if caught by a gust of wind, then zoomed directly at
the trunk through the Willow’s ominously swaying
branches. It jabbed at a place near the roots, and at
once, the writhing tree became still. “Perfect!” panted Hermione. “Wait.” For one teetering second, while the crashes and
booms of the battle filled the air, Harry hesitated.
Voldemort wanted him to do this, wanted him to
come. ... Was he leading Ron and Hermione into a
trap? But then the reality seemed to close upon him, cruel
and plain: The only way forward was to kill the snake,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
and the snake was where Voldemort was, and
Voldemort was at the end of this tunnel. ... “Harry, we’re coming, just get in there!” said Ron,
pushing him forward. Harry wriggled into the earthy passage hidden in the
tree’s roots. It was a much tighter squeeze than it had
been the last time they had entered it. The tunnel was
low-ceilinged: They had had to double up to move
through it nearly four years previously; now there was
nothing for it but to crawl. Harry went first, his wand
illuminated, expecting at any moment to meet
barriers, but none came. They moved in silence,
Harry’s gaze fixed upon the swinging beam of the
wand held in his fist. At last the tunnel began to slope upward and Harry
saw a sliver of light ahead. Hermione tugged at his
ankle. “The Cloak!” she whispered. “Put the Cloak on!” He groped behind him and she forced the bundle of
slippery cloth into his free hand. With difficulty he
dragged it over himself, murmured, “Nox,”
extinguishing his wandlight, and continued on his
hands and knees, as silently as possible, all his
senses straining, expecting every second to be
discovered, to hear a cold clear voice, see a flash of
green light. And then he heard voices coming from the room
directly ahead of them, only slightly muffled by the
fact that the opening at the end of the tunnel had
been blocked up by what looked like an old crate.
Hardly daring to breathe, Harry edged right up to the
opening and peered through a tiny gap left between
crate and wall.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The room beyond was dimly lit, but he could see
Nagini, swirling and coiling like a serpent underwater,
safe in her enchanted, starry sphere, which floated
unsupported in midair. He could see the edge of a
table, and a long-fingered white hand toying with a
wand. Then Snape spoke, and Harry’s heart lurched:
Snape was inches away from where he crouched,
hidden. "... my Lord, their resistance is crumbling — ” “ — and it is doing so without your help,” said
Voldemort in his high, clear voice. “Skilled wizard
though you are, Severus, I do not think you will make
much difference now. We are almost there ... almost.” “Let me find the boy. Let me bring you Potter. I know I
can find him, my Lord. Please.” Snape strode past the gap, and Harry drew back a
little, keeping his eyes fixed upon Nagini, wondering
whether there was any spell that might penetrate the
protection surrounding her, but he could not think of
anything. One failed attempt, and he would give away
his position. ... Voldemort stood up. Harry could see him now, see the
red eyes, the flattened, serpentine face, the pallor of
him gleaming slightly in the semidarkness. “I have a problem, Severus,” said Voldemort softly. “My Lord?” said Snape. Voldemort raised the Elder Wand, holding it as
delicately and precisely as a conductor’s baton. “Why doesn’t it work for me, Severus?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
In the silence Harry imagined he could hear the snake
hissing slightly as it coiled and uncoiled — or was it
Voldemort’s sibilant sigh lingering on the air? “My — my Lord?” said Snape blankly. “I do not
understand. You — you have performed extraordinary
magic with that wand.” “No,” said Voldemort. “I have performed my usual
magic. I am extraordinary, but this wand ... no. It has
not revealed the wonders it has promised. I feel no
difference between this wand and the one I procured
from Ollivander all those years ago.” Voldemort’s tone was musing, calm, but Harry’s scar
had begun to throb and pulse: Pain was building in
his forehead, and he could feel that controlled sense
of fury building inside Voldemort. “No difference,” said Voldemort again. Snape did not speak. Harry could not see his face: He
wondered whether Snape sensed danger, was trying
to find the right words to reassure his master. Voldemort started to move around the room: Harry
lost sight of him for seconds as he prowled, speaking
in that same measured voice, while the pain and fury
mounted in Harry. “I have thought long and hard, Severus. ... Do you
know why I have called you back from the battle?” And for a moment Harry saw Snape ’s profile: His eyes
were fixed upon the coiling snake in its enchanted
cage. “No, my Lord, but I beg you will let me return. Let me
find Potter.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You sound like Lucius. Neither of you understands
Potter as I do. He does not need finding. Potter will
come to me. I know his weakness, you see, his one
great flaw. He will hate watching the others struck
down around him, knowing that it is for him that it
happens. He will want to stop it at any cost. He will
come.” “But my Lord, he might be killed accidentally by one
other than yourself — ” “My instructions to my Death Eaters have been
perfectly clear. Capture Potter. Kill his friends — the
more, the better — but do not kill him. “But it is of you that I wished to speak, Severus, not
Harry Potter. You have been very valuable to me. Very
valuable.” “My Lord knows I seek only to serve him. But — let
me go and find the boy, my Lord. Let me bring him to
you. I know I can — ” “I have told you, no!” said Voldemort, and Harry
caught the glint of red in his eyes as he turned again,
and the swishing of his cloak was like the slithering of
a snake, and he felt Voldemort’s impatience in his
burning scar. “My concern at the moment, Severus, is
what will happen when I finally meet the boy!” “My Lord, there can be no question, surely — ?” “ — but there is a question, Severus. There is.” Voldemort halted, and Harry could see him plainly
again as he slid the Elder Wand through his white
fingers, staring at Snape.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Why did both the wands I have used fail when
directed at Harry Potter?” “I — I cannot answer that, my Lord.” “Can’t you?” The stab of rage felt like a spike driven through
Harry’s head: He forced his own fist into his mouth to
stop himself from crying out in pain. He closed his
eyes, and suddenly he was Voldemort, looking into
Snape’s pale face. “My wand of yew did everything of which I asked it,
Severus, except to kill Harry Potter. Twice it failed.
Ollivander told me under torture of the twin cores,
told me to take another’s wand. I did so, but Lucius’s
wand shattered upon meeting Potter’s.” “I — I have no explanation, my Lord.” Snape was not looking at Voldemort now. His dark
eyes were still fixed upon the coiling serpent in its
protective sphere. “I sought a third wand, Severus. The Elder Wand, the
Wand of Destiny, the Deathstick. I took it from its
previous master. I took it from the grave of Albus
Dumbledore.” And now Snape looked at Voldemort, and Snape’s
face was like a death mask. It was marble white and
so still that when he spoke, it was a shock to see that
anyone lived behind the blank eyes. “My Lord — let me go to the boy — ” “All this long night, when I am on the brink of victory, I have sat here,” said Voldemort, his voice barely  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
louder than a whisper, “wondering, wondering, why
the Elder Wand refuses to be what it ought to be,
refuses to perform as legend says it must perform for
its rightful owner ... and I think I have the answer.” Snape did not speak. “Perhaps you already know it? You are a clever man,
after all, Severus. You have been a good and faithful
servant, and I regret what must happen.” “My Lord — ” “The Elder Wand cannot serve me properly, Severus,
because I am not its true master. The Elder Wand
belongs to the wizard who killed its last owner. You
killed Albus Dumbledore. While you live, Severus, the
Elder Wand cannot be truly mine.” “My Lord!” Snape protested, raising his wand. “It cannot be any other way,” said Voldemort. “I must
master the wand, Severus. Master the wand, and I
master Potter at last.” And Voldemort swiped the air with the Elder Wand. It
did nothing to Snape, who for a split second seemed
to think he had been reprieved: But then Voldemort’s
intention became clear. The snake’s cage was rolling
through the air, and before Snape could do anything
more than yell, it had encased him, head and
shoulders, and Voldemort spoke in Parseltongue. “Kill.” There was a terrible scream. Harry saw Snape ’s face
losing the little color it had left; it whitened as his
black eyes widened, as the snake’s fangs pierced his  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
neck, as he failed to push the enchanted cage off
himself, as his knees gave way and he fell to the floor. “I regret it,” said Voldemort coldly. He turned away; there was no sadness in him, no
remorse. It was time to leave this shack and take
charge, with a wand that would now do his full
bidding. He pointed it at the starry cage holding the
snake, which drifted upward, off Snape, who fell
sideways onto the floor, blood gushing from the
wounds in his neck. Voldemort swept from the room
without a backward glance, and the great serpent
floated after him in its huge protective sphere. Back in the tunnel and his own mind, Harry opened
his eyes: He had drawn blood biting down on his
knuckles in the effort not to shout out. Now he was
looking through the tiny crack between crate and
wall, watching a foot in a black boot trembling on the
floor. “Harry!” breathed Hermione behind him, but he had
already pointed his wand at the crate blocking his
view. It lifted an inch into the air and drifted sideways
silently. As quietly as he could, he pulled himself up
into the room. He did not know why he was doing it, why he was
approaching the dying man: He did not know what he
felt as he saw Snape’s white face, and the fingers
trying to staunch the bloody wound at his neck. Harry took off the Invisibility Cloak and looked down
upon the man he hated, whose widening black eyes
found Harry as he tried to speak. Harry bent over
him, and Snape seized the front of his robes and
pulled him close.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
A terrible rasping, gurgling noise issued from Snape’s
throat. “Take ... it. ... Take ... it. ...” Something more than blood was leaking from Snape.
Silvery blue, neither gas nor liquid, it gushed from his
mouth and his ears and his eyes, and Harry knew
what it was, but did not know what to do — A flask, conjured from thin air, was thrust into his
shaking hands by Hermione. Harry lifted the silvery
substance into it with his wand. When the flask was
full to the brim, and Snape looked as though there
was no blood left in him, his grip on Harry’s robes
slackened. “Look ... at ... me. ...” he whispered. The green eyes found the black, but after a second,
something in the depths of the dark pair seemed to
vanish, leaving them fixed, blank, and empty. The
hand holding Harry thudded to the floor, and Snape
moved no more.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE PRINCE’S TALE Harry remained kneeling at Snape’s side, simply
staring down at him, until quite suddenly a high, cold
voice spoke so close to them that Harry jumped to his
feet, the flask gripped tightly in his hands, thinking
that Voldemort had reentered the room. Voldemort ’s voice reverberated from the walls and
floor, and Harry realized that he was talking to
Hogwarts and to all the surrounding area, that the
residents of Hogsmeade and all those still fighting in
the castle would hear him as clearly as if he stood
beside them, his breath on the back of their necks, a
deathblow away. “You have fought,” said the high, cold voice, “valiantly. Lord Voldemort knows how to value
bravery. “Yet you have sustained heavy losses. If you continue
to resist me, you will all die, one by one. I do not wish
this to happen. Every drop of magical blood spilled is
a loss and a waste.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling “Lord Voldemort is merciful. I command my forces to
retreat immediately. “You have one hour. Dispose of your dead with
dignity. Treat your injured. “I speak now, Harry Potter, directly to you. You have
permitted your friends to die for you rather than face
me yourself. I shall wait for one hour in the Forbidden
Forest. If, at the end of that hour, you have not come
to me, have not given yourself up, then battle
recommences. This time, I shall enter the fray myself,
Harry Potter, and I shall find you, and I shall punish
every last man, woman, and child who has tried to
conceal you from me. One hour.” Both Ron and Hermione shook their heads frantically,
looking at Harry. “Don’t listen to him,” said Ron. “It’ll be all right,” said Hermione wildly. “Let’s — let’s
get back to the castle, if he’s gone to the forest we’ll
need to think of a new plan — ” She glanced at Snape’s body, then hurried back to
the tunnel entrance. Ron followed her. Harry gathered
up the Invisibility Cloak, then looked down at Snape.
He did not know what to feel, except shock at the way
Snape had been killed, and the reason for which it
had been done. ... They crawled back through the tunnel, none of them
talking, and Harry wondered whether Ron and
Hermione could still hear Voldemort ringing in their
heads, as he could.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
You have permitted your friends to die for you rather
than face me yourself I shall wait for one hour in the
Forbidden Forest. . . . One hour. . . . Small bundles seemed to litter the lawn at the front of
the castle. It could only be an hour or so from dawn,
yet it was pitch-black. The three of them hurried
toward the stone steps. A lone clog, the size of a small
boat, lay abandoned in front of them. There was no
other sign of Grawp or of his attacker. The castle was unnaturally silent. There were no
flashes of light now, no bangs or screams or shouts.
The flagstones of the deserted entrance hall were
stained with blood. Emeralds were still scattered all
over the floor, along with pieces of marble and
splintered wood. Part of the banisters had been blown
away. “Where is everyone?” whispered Hermione. Ron led the way to the Great Hall. Harry stopped in
the doorway. The House tables were gone and the room was
crowded. The survivors stood in groups, their arms
around each other’s necks. The injured were being
treated upon the raised platform by Madam Pomfrey
and a group of helpers. Firenze was amongst the
injured; his flank poured blood and he shook where
he lay, unable to stand. The dead lay in a row in the middle of the Hall. Harry
could not see Fred’s body, because his family
surrounded him. George was kneeling at his head;
Mrs. Weasley was lying across Fred’s chest, her body
shaking, Mr. Weasley stroking her hair while tears
cascaded down his cheeks.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Without a word to Harry, Ron and Hermione walked
away. Harry saw Hermione approach Ginny, whose
face was swollen and blotchy, and hug her. Ron
joined Bill, Fleur, and Percy, who flung an arm
around Ron’s shoulders. As Ginny and Hermione
moved closer to the rest of the family, Harry had a
clear view of the bodies lying next to Fred: Remus and
Tonks, pale and still and peaceful-looking, apparently
asleep beneath the dark, enchanted ceiling. The Great Hall seemed to fly away, become smaller,
shrink, as Harry reeled backward from the doorway.
He could not draw breath. He could not bear to look
at any of the other bodies, to see who else had died
for him. He could not bear to join the Weasleys, could
not look into their eyes, when if he had given himself
up in the first place, Fred might never have died. ... He turned away and ran up the marble staircase.
Lupin, Tonks ... He yearned not to feel. ... He wished
he could rip out his heart, his innards, everything
that was screaming inside him. ... The castle was completely empty; even the ghosts
seemed to have joined the mass mourning in the
Great Hall. Harry ran without stopping, clutching the
crystal flask of Snape’s last thoughts, and he did not
slow down until he reached the stone gargoyle
guarding the headmaster’s office. “Password?” “Dumbledore!” said Harry without thinking, because
it was he whom he yearned to see, and to his surprise
the gargoyle slid aside, revealing the spiral staircase
behind. But when Harry burst into the circular office he found
a change. The portraits that hung all around the  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
walls were empty. Not a single headmaster or
headmistress remained to see him; all, it seemed, had
flitted away, charging through the paintings that lined
the castle, so that they could have a clear view of
what was going on. Harry glanced hopelessly at Dumbledore’s deserted
frame, which hung directly behind the headmaster’s
chair, then turned his back on it. The stone Pensieve
lay in the cabinet where it had always been: Harry
heaved it onto the desk and poured Snape’s memories
into the wide basin with its runic markings around
the edge. To escape into someone else’s head would
be a blessed relief. ... Nothing that even Snape had
left him could be worse than his own thoughts. The
memories swirled, silver white and strange, and
without hesitating, with a feeling of reckless
abandonment, as though this would assuage his
torturing grief, Harry dived. He fell headlong into sunlight, and his feet found
warm ground. When he straightened up, he saw that
he was in a nearly deserted playground. A single huge
chimney dominated the distant skyline. Two girls
were swinging backward and forward, and a skinny
boy was watching them from behind a clump of
bushes. His black hair was overlong and his clothes
were so mismatched that it looked deliberate: too
short jeans, a shabby, overlarge coat that might have
belonged to a grown man, an odd smocklike shirt. Harry moved closer to the boy. Snape looked no more
than nine or ten years old, sallow, small, stringy.
There was undisguised greed in his thin face as he
watched the younger of the two girls swinging higher
and higher than her sister. “Lily, don’t do it!” shrieked the elder of the two.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
But the girl had let go of the swing at the very height
of its arc and flown into the air, quite literally flown,
launched herself skyward with a great shout of
laughter, and instead of crumpling on the playground
asphalt, she soared like a trapeze artist through the
air, staying up far too long, landing far too lightly. “Mummy told you not to!” Petunia stopped her swing by dragging the heels of
her sandals on the ground, making a crunching,
grinding sound, then leapt up, hands on hips. “Mummy said you weren’t allowed, Lily!” “But I’m fine,” said Lily, still giggling. “Tuney, look at
this. Watch what I can do.” Petunia glanced around. The playground was
deserted apart from themselves and, though the girls
did not know it, Snape. Lily had picked up a fallen
flower from the bush behind which Snape lurked.
Petunia advanced, evidently torn between curiosity
and disapproval. Lily waited until Petunia was near
enough to have a clear view, then held out her palm.
The flower sat there, opening and closing its petals,
like some bizarre, many-lipped oyster. “Stop it!” shrieked Petunia. “It’s not hurting you,” said Lily, but she closed her
hand on the blossom and threw it back to the ground. “It’s not right,” said Petunia, but her eyes had
followed the flower’s flight to the ground and lingered
upon it. “How do you do it?” she added, and there
was definite longing in her voice.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“It’s obvious, isn’t it?” Snape could no longer contain
himself, but had jumped out from behind the bushes.
Petunia shrieked and ran backward toward the
swings, but Lily, though clearly startled, remained
where she was. Snape seemed to regret his
appearance. A dull flush of color mounted the sallow
cheeks as he looked at Lily. “What’s obvious?” asked Lily. Snape had an air of nervous excitement. With a
glance at the distant Petunia, now hovering beside the
swings, he lowered his voice and said, “I know what
you are.” “What do you mean?” “You’re ... you’re a witch,” whispered Snape. She looked affronted. “ That’s not a very nice thing to say to somebody!” She turned, nose in the air, and marched off toward
her sister. “No!” said Snape. He was highly colored now, and
Harry wondered why he did not take off the
ridiculously large coat, unless it was because he did
not want to reveal the smock beneath it. He flapped
after the girls, looking ludicrously batlike, like his
older self. The sisters considered him, united in disapproval,
both holding on to one of the swing poles as though it
was the safe place in tag.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You are,” said Snape to Lily. “You are a witch. I’ve
been watching you for a while. But there’s nothing
wrong with that. My mum’s one, and I’m a wizard.” Petunia’s laugh was like cold water. “Wizard!” she shrieked, her courage returned now
that she had recovered from the shock of his
unexpected appearance. “I know who you are. You’re
that Snape boy! They live down Spinner’s End by the
river,” she told Lily, and it was evident from her tone
that she considered the address a poor
recommendation. “Why have you been spying on us?” “Haven’t been spying,” said Snape, hot and
uncomfortable and dirty-haired in the bright sunlight.
“Wouldn’t spy on you, anyway,” he added spitefully, “ you’re a Muggle.” Though Petunia evidently did not understand the
word, she could hardly mistake the tone. “Lily, come on, we’re leaving!” she said shrilly. Lily
obeyed her sister at once, glaring at Snape as she left.
He stood watching them as they marched through the
playground gate, and Harry, the only one left to
observe him, recognized Snape ’s bitter
disappointment, and understood that Snape had been
planning this moment for a while, and that it had all
gone wrong. . . . The scene dissolved, and before Harry knew it, re-
formed around him. He was now in a small thicket of
trees. He could see a sunlit river glittering through
their trunks. The shadows cast by the trees made a
basin of cool green shade. Two children sat facing
each other, cross-legged on the ground. Snape had
removed his coat now; his odd smock looked less
peculiar in the half light.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
"... and the Ministry can punish you if you do magic
outside school, you get letters.” “But I have done magic outside school!” “We’re all right. We haven’t got wands yet. They let
you off when you’re a kid and you can’t help it. But
once you’re eleven,” he nodded importantly, “and they
start training you, then you’ve got to go careful.” There was a little silence. Lily had picked up a fallen
twig and twirled it in the air, and Harry knew that she
was imagining sparks trailing from it. Then she
dropped the twig, leaned in toward the boy, and said,
“It is real, isn’t it? It’s not a joke? Petunia says you’re
lying to me. Petunia says there isn’t a Hogwarts. It is
real, isn’t it?” “It’s real for us,” said Snape. “Not for her. But we’ll get
the letter, you and me.” “Really?” whispered Lily. “Definitely,” said Snape, and even with his poorly cut
hair and his odd clothes, he struck an oddly
impressive figure sprawled in front of her, brimful of
confidence in his destiny. “And will it really come by owl?” Lily whispered. “Normally,” said Snape. “But you’re Muggle-born, so
someone from the school will have to come and
explain to your parents.” “Does it make a difference, being Muggle-born?” Snape hesitated. His black eyes, eager in the greenish
gloom, moved over the pale face, the dark red hair.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“No,” he said. “It doesn’t make any difference.” “Good,” said Lily, relaxing: It was clear that she had
been worrying. “You’ve got loads of magic,” said Snape. “I saw that.
All the time I was watching you ...” His voice trailed away; she was not listening, but had
stretched out on the leafy ground and was looking up
at the canopy of leaves overhead. He watched her as
greedily as he had watched her in the playground. “How are things at your house?” Lily asked. A little crease appeared between his eyes. “Fine,” he said. “They’re not arguing anymore?” “Oh yes, they’re arguing,” said Snape. He picked up a
fistful of leaves and began tearing them apart,
apparently unaware of what he was doing. “But it
won’t be that long and I’ll be gone.” “Doesn’t your dad like magic?” “He doesn’t like anything, much,” said Snape. “Severus?” A little smile twisted Snape ’s mouth when she said
his name. “Yeah?” “Tell me about the dementors again.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“What d’you want to know about them for?” “If I use magic outside school — ” “They wouldn’t give you to the dementors for that!
Dementors are for people who do really bad stuff.
They guard the wizard prison, Azkaban. You’re not
going to end up in Azkaban, you’re too — ” He turned red again and shredded more leaves. Then
a small rustling noise behind Harry made him turn:
Petunia, hiding behind a tree, had lost her footing. “Tuney!” said Lily, surprise and welcome in her voice,
but Snape had jumped to his feet. “Who’s spying now?” he shouted. “What d’you want?” Petunia was breathless, alarmed at being caught.
Harry could see her struggling for something hurtful
to say. “What is that you’re wearing, anyway?” she said,
pointing at Snape’s chest. “Your mum’s blouse?” There was a crack: A branch over Petunia’s head had
fallen. Lily screamed: The branch caught Petunia on
the shoulder, and she staggered backward and burst
into tears. “Tuney!” But Petunia was running away. Lily rounded on
Snape. “Did you make that happen?” “No.” He looked both defiant and scared.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You did!” She was backing away from him. “You did).
You hurt her!” “No — no I didn’t!” But the lie did not convince Lily: After one last
burning look, she ran from the little thicket, off after
her sister, and Snape looked miserable and confused. And the scene re-formed. Harry looked around: He
was on platform nine and three-quarters, and Snape
stood beside him, slightly hunched, next to a thin,
sallow-faced, sour-looking woman who greatly
resembled him. Snape was staring at a family of four
a short distance away. The two girls stood a little
apart from their parents. Lily seemed to be pleading
with her sister; Harry moved closer to listen. "... I’m sorry, Tuney, I’m sorry! Listen — ” She caught
her sister’s hand and held tight to it, even though
Petunia tried to pull it away. “Maybe once I’m there —
no, listen, Tuney! Maybe once I’m there, I’ll be able to
go to Professor Dumbledore and persuade him to
change his mind!” “I don’t — want — to — go!” said Petunia, and she
dragged her hand back out of her sister’s grasp. “You
think I want to go to some stupid castle and learn to
be a — a — ” Her pale eyes roved over the platform, over the cats
mewling in their owners’ arms, over the owls
fluttering and hooting at each other in cages, over the
students, some already in their long black robes,
loading trunks onto the scarlet steam engine or else
greeting one another with glad cries after a summer
apart.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ — you think I want to be a — a freak?” Lily’s eyes filled with tears as Petunia succeeded in
tugging her hand away. “I’m not a freak,” said Lily. “That’s a horrible thing to
say.” “That’s where you’re going,” said Petunia with relish.
“A special school for freaks. You and that Snape boy
... weirdos, that’s what you two are. It’s good you’re
being separated from normal people. It’s for our
safety.” Lily glanced toward her parents, who were looking
around the platform with an air of wholehearted
enjoyment, drinking in the scene. Then she looked
back at her sister, and her voice was low and fierce. “You didn’t think it was such a freak’s school when
you wrote to the headmaster and begged him to take
you.” Petunia turned scarlet. “Beg? I didn’t beg!” “I saw his reply. It was very kind.” “You shouldn’t have read — ” whispered Petunia, “that
was my private — how could you — ?” Lily gave herself away by half-glancing toward where
Snape stood nearby. Petunia gasped. “That boy found it! You and that boy have been
sneaking in my room!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“No — not sneaking — ” Now Lily was on the
defensive. “Severus saw the envelope, and he couldn’t
believe a Muggle could have contacted Hogwarts,
that’s all! He says there must be wizards working
undercover in the postal service who take care of — ” “Apparently wizards poke their noses in everywhere!”
said Petunia, now as pale as she had been flushed. “ Freak).” she spat at her sister, and she flounced off to
where her parents stood. ... The scene dissolved again. Snape was hurrying along
the corridor of the Hogwarts Express as it clattered
through the countryside. He had already changed into
his school robes, had perhaps taken the first
opportunity to take off his dreadful Muggle clothes. At
last he stopped, outside a compartment in which a
group of rowdy boys were talking. Hunched in a
corner seat beside the window was Lily, her face
pressed against the windowpane. Snape slid open the compartment door and sat down
opposite Lily. She glanced at him and then looked
back out of the window. She had been crying. “I don’t want to talk to you,” she said in a constricted
voice. “Why not?” “Tuney h-hates me. Because we saw that letter from
Dumbledore.” “So what?” She threw him a look of deep dislike. “So she’s my sister!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“She’s only a — ” He caught himself quickly; Lily, too
busy trying to wipe her eyes without being noticed,
did not hear him. “But we’re going!” he said, unable to suppress the
exhilaration in his voice. “This is it! We’re off to
Hogwarts!” She nodded, mopping her eyes, but in spite of herself,
she half smiled. “You’d better be in Slytherin,” said Snape, encouraged
that she had brightened a little. “Slytherin?” One of the boys sharing the compartment, who had
shown no interest at all in Lily or Snape until that
point, looked around at the word, and Harry, whose
attention had been focused entirely on the two beside
the window, saw his father: slight, black-haired like
Snape, but with that indefinable air of having been
well-cared-for, even adored, that Snape so
conspicuously lacked. “Who wants to be in Slytherin? I think I’d leave,
wouldn’t you?” James asked the boy lounging on the
seats opposite him, and with a jolt, Harry realized
that it was Sirius. Sirius did not smile. “My whole family have been in Slytherin,” he said. “Blimey,” said James, “and I thought you seemed all
right!” Sirius grinned. “Maybe I’ll break the tradition. Where are you
heading, if you’ve got the choice?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
James lifted an invisible sword. “ ‘Gryffindor, where dwell the brave at heart!’ Like my
dad.” Snape made a small, disparaging noise. James turned
on him. “Got a problem with that?” “No,” said Snape, though his slight sneer said
otherwise. “If you’d rather be brawny than brainy — ” “Where ’re you hoping to go, seeing as you’re neither?”
interjected Sirius. James roared with laughter. Lily sat up, rather
flushed, and looked from James to Sirius in dislike. “Come on, Severus, let’s find another compartment.” “Oooooo ...” James and Sirius imitated her lofty voice; James tried
to trip Snape as he passed. “See ya, Snivellus!” a voice called, as the
compartment door slammed. ... And the scene dissolved once more. ... Harry was standing right behind Snape as they faced
the candlelit House tables, lined with rapt faces. Then
Professor McGonagall said, “Evans, Lily!” He watched his mother walk forward on trembling
legs and sit down upon the rickety stool. Professor
McGonagall dropped the Sorting Hat onto her head,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
and barely a second after it had touched the dark red
hair, the hat cried, “ Gryffindoii” Harry heard Snape let out a tiny groan. Lily took off
the hat, handed it back to Professor McGonagall, then
hurried toward the cheering Gryffindors, but as she
went she glanced back at Snape, and there was a sad
little smile on her face. Harry saw Sirius move up the
bench to make room for her. She took one look at
him, seemed to recognize him from the train, folded
her arms, and firmly turned her back on him. The roll call continued. Harry watched Lupin,
Pettigrew, and his father join Lily and Sirius at the
Gryffindor table. At last, when only a dozen students
remained to be sorted, Professor McGonagall called
Snape. Harry walked with him to the stool, watched him
place the hat upon his head. “Slytherinl” cried the
Sorting Hat. And Severus Snape moved off to the other side of the
Hall, away from Lily, to where the Slytherins were
cheering him, to where Lucius Malfoy, a prefect badge
gleaming upon his chest, patted Snape on the back as
he sat down beside him. ... And the scene changed. ... Lily and Snape were walking across the castle
courtyard, evidently arguing. Harry hurried to catch
up with them, to listen in. As he reached them, he
realized how much taller they both were: A few years
seemed to have passed since their Sorting. "... thought we were supposed to be friends?” Snape
was saying. “Best friends?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We are, Sev, but I don’t like some of the people you’re
hanging round with! I’m sorry, but I detest Avery and
Mulciber! Mulciber\ What do you see in him, Sev, he’s
creepy! D’you know what he tried to do to Mary
Macdonald the other day?” Lily had reached a pillar and leaned against it,
looking up into the thin, sallow face. “That was nothing,” said Snape. “It was a laugh,
that’s all — ” “It was Dark Magic, and if you think that’s funny — ” “What about the stuff Potter and his mates get up
to?” demanded Snape. His color rose again as he said
it, unable, it seemed, to hold in his resentment. “What’s Potter got to do with anything?” said Lily. “They sneak out at night. There’s something weird
about that Lupin. Where does he keep going?” “He’s ill,” said Lily. “They say he’s ill — ” “Every month at the full moon?” said Snape. “I know your theory,” said Lily, and she sounded cold.
“Why are you so obsessed with them anyway? Why do
you care what they’re doing at night?” “I’m just trying to show you they’re not as wonderful
as everyone seems to think they are.” The intensity of his gaze made her blush. “They don’t use Dark Magic, though.” She dropped
her voice. “And you’re being really ungrateful. I heard
what happened the other night. You went sneaking  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
down that tunnel by the Whomping Willow, and
James Potter saved you from whatever’s down there Snape’s whole face contorted and he spluttered,
“Saved? Saved? You think he was playing the hero? He was saving his neck and his friends’ too! You’re
not going to — I won’t let you — ” “Let me? Let me?” Lily’s bright green eyes were slits. Snape backtracked
at once. “I didn’t mean — I just don’t want to see you made a
fool of — He fancies you, James Potter fancies you!”
The words seemed wrenched from him against his
will. “And he’s not ... everyone thinks ... big Quidditch
hero — ” Snape’s bitterness and dislike were rendering
him incoherent, and Lily’s eyebrows were traveling
farther and farther up her forehead. “I know James Potter’s an arrogant toerag,” she said,
cutting across Snape. “I don’t need you to tell me
that. But Mulciber’s and Avery’s idea of humor is just
evil. Evil, Sev. I don’t understand how you can be
friends with them.” Harry doubted that Snape had even heard her
strictures on Mulciber and Avery. The moment she
had insulted James Potter, his whole body had
relaxed, and as they walked away there was a new
spring in Snape’s step. ... And the scene dissolved. ... Harry watched again as Snape left the Great Hall after
sitting his O.W.L. in Defense Against the Dark Arts,
watched as he wandered away from the castle and  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
strayed inadvertently close to the place beneath the
beech tree where James, Sirius, Lupin, and Pettigrew
sat together. But Harry kept his distance this time,
because he knew what happened after James had
hoisted Severus into the air and taunted him; he
knew what had been done and said, and it gave him
no pleasure to hear it again. ... He watched as Lily
joined the group and went to Snape’s defense.
Distantly he heard Snape shout at her in his
humiliation and his fury, the unforgivable word:
“MudbloocL.” The scene changed. ... “I’m sorry.” “I’m not interested.” “I’m sorry!” “Save your breath.” It was nighttime. Lily, who was wearing a dressing
gown, stood with her arms folded in front of the
portrait of the Fat Lady, at the entrance to Gryffindor
Tower. “I only came out because Mary told me you were
threatening to sleep here.” “I was. I would have done. I never meant to call you
Mudblood, it just — ” “Slipped out?” There was no pity in Lily’s voice. “It’s
too late. I’ve made excuses for you for years. None of
my friends can understand why I even talk to you.
You and your precious little Death Eater friends —
you see, you don’t even deny it! You don’t even deny  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
that’s what you’re all aiming to be! You can’t wait to
join You- Know- Who, can you?” He opened his mouth, but closed it without speaking. “I can’t pretend anymore. You’ve chosen your way, I’ve chosen mine.” “No — listen, I didn’t mean — ” “ — to call me Mudblood? But you call everyone of my
birth Mudblood, Severus. Why should I be any
different?” He struggled on the verge of speech, but with a
contemptuous look she turned and climbed back
through the portrait hole. ... The corridor dissolved, and the scene took a little
longer to reform: Harry seemed to fly through shifting
shapes and colors until his surroundings solidified
again and he stood on a hilltop, forlorn and cold in
the darkness, the wind whistling through the
branches of a few leafless trees. The adult Snape was
panting, turning on the spot, his wand gripped tightly
in his hand, waiting for something or for someone. ...
His fear infected Harry too, even though he knew that
he could not be harmed, and he looked over his
shoulder, wondering what it was that Snape was
waiting for — Then a blinding, jagged jet of white light flew through
the air: Harry thought of lightning, but Snape had
dropped to his knees and his wand had flown out of
his hand. “Don’t kill me!” “That was not my intention.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Any sound of Dumbledore Apparating had been
drowned by the sound of the wind in the branches. He stood before Snape with his robes whipping
around him, and his face was illuminated from below
in the light cast by his wand. “Well, Severus? What message does Lord Voldemort
have for me?” “No — no message — I’m here on my own account!” Snape was wringing his hands: He looked a little
mad, with his straggling black hair flying around him. “I — I come with a warning — no, a request — please Dumbledore flicked his wand. Though leaves and
branches still flew through the night air around them,
silence fell on the spot where he and Snape faced
each other. “What request could a Death Eater make of me?” “The — the prophecy . . . the prediction . . . Trelawney “Ah, yes,” said Dumbledore. “How much did you relay
to Lord Voldemort?” “Everything — everything I heard!” said Snape. “That
is why — it is for that reason — he thinks it means
Lily Evans!” “The prophecy did not refer to a woman,” said
Dumbledore. “It spoke of a boy born at the end of
July — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You know what I mean! He thinks it means her son,
he is going to hunt her down — kill them all — ” “If she means so much to you,” said Dumbledore,
“surely Lord Voldemort will spare her? Could you not
ask for mercy for the mother, in exchange for the
son?” “I have — I have asked him — ” “You disgust me,” said Dumbledore, and Harry had
never heard so much contempt in his voice. Snape
seemed to shrink a little. “You do not care, then,
about the deaths of her husband and child? They can
die, as long as you have what you want?” Snape said nothing, but merely looked up at
Dumbledore. “Hide them all, then,” he croaked. “Keep her — them
— safe. Please.” “And what will you give me in return, Severus?” “In — in return?” Snape gaped at Dumbledore, and
Harry expected him to protest, but after a long
moment he said, “Anything.” The hilltop faded, and Harry stood in Dumbledore’s
office, and something was making a terrible sound,
like a wounded animal. Snape was slumped forward
in a chair and Dumbledore was standing over him,
looking grim. After a moment or two, Snape raised his
face, and he looked like a man who had lived a
hundred years of misery since leaving the wild hilltop. “I thought ... you were going ... to keep her ... safe.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“She and James put their faith in the wrong person,”
said Dumbledore. “Rather like you, Severus. Weren’t
you hoping that Lord Voldemort would spare her?” Snape’s breathing was shallow. “Her boy survives,” said Dumbledore. With a tiny jerk of the head, Snape seemed to flick off
an irksome fly. “Her son lives. He has her eyes, precisely her eyes. You remember the shape and color of Lily Evans’s
eyes, I am sure?” “DON’T!” bellowed Snape. “Gone ... dead ...” “Is this remorse, Severus?” “I wish ... I wish / were dead. ...” “And what use would that be to anyone?” said
Dumbledore coldly. “If you loved Lily Evans, if you
truly loved her, then your way forward is clear.” Snape seemed to peer through a haze of pain, and
Dumbledore ’s words appeared to take a long time to
reach him. “What — what do you mean?” “You know how and why she died. Make sure it was
not in vain. Help me protect Lily’s son.” “He does not need protection. The Dark Lord has gone “The Dark Lord will return, and Harry Potter will be in
terrible danger when he does.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
There was a long pause, and slowly Snape regained
control of himself, mastered his own breathing. At
last he said, “Very well. Very well. But never — never
tell, Dumbledore! This must be between us! Swear it! I
cannot bear . . . especially Potter’s son ... I want your
word!” “My word, Severus, that I shall never reveal the best
of you?” Dumbledore sighed, looking down into
Snape’s ferocious, anguished face. “If you insist ...” The office dissolved but re-formed instantly. Snape
was pacing up and down in front of Dumbledore. “ — mediocre, arrogant as his father, a determined
rule-breaker, delighted to find himself famous,
attention-seeking and impertinent — ” “You see what you expect to see, Severus,” said
Dumbledore, without raising his eyes from a copy of
Transfiguration Today. “Other teachers report that the
boy is modest, likable, and reasonably talented.
Personally, I find him an engaging child.” Dumbledore turned a page, and said, without looking
up, “Keep an eye on Quirrell, won’t you?” A whirl of color, and now everything darkened, and
Snape and Dumbledore stood a little apart in the
entrance hall, while the last stragglers from the Yule
Ball passed them on their way to bed. “Well?” murmured Dumbledore. “Karkaroff’s Mark is becoming darker too. He is
panicking, he fears retribution; you know how much
help he gave the Ministry after the Dark Lord fell.”
Snape looked sideways at Dumbledore ’s crooked- P a g e |  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
nosed profile. “Karkaroff intends to flee if the Mark
burns.” “Does he?” said Dumbledore softly, as Fleur Delacour
and Roger Davies came giggling in from the grounds.
“And are you tempted to join him?” “No,” said Snape, his black eyes on Fleur’s and
Roger’s retreating figures. “I am not such a coward.” “No,” agreed Dumbledore. “You are a braver man by
far than Igor Karkaroff. You know, I sometimes think
we Sort too soon. ...” He walked away, leaving Snape looking stricken. ... And now Harry stood in the headmaster’s office yet
again. It was nighttime, and Dumbledore sagged
sideways in the thronelike chair behind the desk,
apparently semiconscious. His right hand dangled
over the side, blackened and burned. Snape was
muttering incantations, pointing his wand at the
wrist of the hand, while with his left hand he tipped a
goblet full of thick golden potion down Dumbledore ’s
throat. After a moment or two, Dumbledore ’s eyelids
fluttered and opened. “Why,” said Snape, without preamble, “ why did you
put on that ring? It carries a curse, surely you
realized that. Why even touch it?” Marvolo Gaunt’s ring lay on the desk before
Dumbledore. It was cracked; the sword of Gryffindor
lay beside it. Dumbledore grimaced. “I ... was a fool. Sorely tempted ...”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Tempted by what?”
Dumbledore did not answer. “It is a miracle you managed to return here!” Snape
sounded furious. “That ring carried a curse of
extraordinary power, to contain it is all we can hope
for; I have trapped the curse in one hand for the time
being — ” Dumbledore raised his blackened, useless hand, and
examined it with the expression of one being shown
an interesting curio. “You have done very well, Severus. How long do you
think I have?” Dumbledore ’s tone was conversational; he might have
been asking for a weather forecast. Snape hesitated,
and then said, “I cannot tell. Maybe a year. There is
no halting such a spell forever. It will spread
eventually, it is the sort of curse that strengthens over
time.” Dumbledore smiled. The news that he had less than a
year to live seemed a matter of little or no concern to
him. “I am fortunate, extremely fortunate, that I have you,
Severus.” “If you had only summoned me a little earlier, I might
have been able to do more, buy you more time!” said
Snape furiously. He looked down at the broken ring
and the sword. “Did you think that breaking the ring
would break the curse?” “Something like that ... I was delirious, no doubt. ...”
said Dumbledore. With an effort he straightened  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
himself in his chair. “Well, really, this makes matters
much more straightforward.” Snape looked utterly perplexed. Dumbledore smiled. “I refer to the plan Lord Voldemort is revolving around
me. His plan to have the poor Malfoy boy murder me.” Snape sat down in the chair Harry had so often
occupied, across the desk from Dumbledore. Harry
could tell that he wanted to say more on the subject
of Dumbledore ’s cursed hand, but the other held it up
in polite refusal to discuss the matter further.
Scowling, Snape said, “The Dark Lord does not expect
Draco to succeed. This is merely punishment for
Lucius’s recent failures. Slow torture for Draco’s
parents, while they watch him fail and pay the price.” “In short, the boy has had a death sentence
pronounced upon him as surely as I have,” said
Dumbledore. “Now, I should have thought the natural
successor to the job, once Draco fails, is yourself?” There was a short pause. “That, I think, is the Dark Lord’s plan.” “Lord Voldemort foresees a moment in the near future
when he will not need a spy at Hogwarts?” “He believes the school will soon be in his grasp, yes.” “And if it does fall into his grasp,” said Dumbledore,
almost, it seemed, as an aside, “I have your word that
you will do all in your power to protect the students of
Hogwarts?” Snape gave a stiff nod.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Good. Now then. Your first priority will be to discover
what Draco is up to. A frightened teenage boy is a
danger to others as well as to himself. Offer him help
and guidance, he ought to accept, he likes you — ” “ — much less since his father has lost favor. Draco
blames me, he thinks I have usurped Lucius’s
position.” “All the same, try. I am concerned less for myself than
for accidental victims of whatever schemes might
occur to the boy. Ultimately, of course, there is only
one thing to be done if we are to save him from Lord
Voldemort’s wrath.” Snape raised his eyebrows and his tone was sardonic
as he asked, “Are you intending to let him kill you?” “Certainly not. You must kill me.” There was a long silence, broken only by an odd
clicking noise. Fawkes the phoenix was gnawing a bit
of cuttlebone. “Would you like me to do it now?” asked Snape, his
voice heavy with irony. “Or would you like a few
moments to compose an epitaph?” “Oh, not quite yet,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “I
daresay the moment will present itself in due course.
Given what has happened tonight,” he indicated his
withered hand, “we can be sure that it will happen
within a year.” “If you don’t mind dying,” said Snape roughly, “why
not let Draco do it?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“That boy’s soul is not yet so damaged,” said
Dumbledore. “I would not have it ripped apart on my
account.” “And my soul, Dumbledore? Mine?” “You alone know whether it will harm your soul to
help an old man avoid pain and humiliation,” said
Dumbledore. “I ask this one great favor of you,
Severus, because death is coming for me as surely as
the Chudley Cannons will finish bottom of this year’s
league. I confess I should prefer a quick, painless exit
to the protracted and messy affair it will be if, for
instance, Greyback is involved — I hear Voldemort
has recruited him? Or dear Bellatrix, who likes to
play with her food before she eats it.” His tone was light, but his blue eyes pierced Snape as
they had frequently pierced Harry, as though the soul
they discussed was visible to him. At last Snape gave
another curt nod. Dumbledore seemed satisfied. “Thank you, Severus ...” The office disappeared, and now Snape and
Dumbledore were strolling together in the deserted
castle grounds by twilight. “What are you doing with Potter, all these evenings
you are closeted together?” Snape asked abruptly. Dumbledore looked weary. “Why? You aren’t trying to give him more detentions,
Severus? The boy will soon have spent more time in
detention than out.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“He is his father over again — ” “In looks, perhaps, but his deepest nature is much
more like his mother’s. I spend time with Harry
because I have things to discuss with him,
information I must give him before it is too late.” “Information,” repeated Snape. “You trust him ... you
do not trust me.” “It is not a question of trust. I have, as we both know,
limited time. It is essential that I give the boy enough
information for him to do what he needs to do.” “And why may I not have the same information?” “I prefer not to put all of my secrets in one basket,
particularly not a basket that spends so much time
dangling on the arm of Lord Voldemort.” “Which I do on your orders!” “And you do it extremely well. Do not think that I
underestimate the constant danger in which you
place yourself, Severus. To give Voldemort what
appears to be valuable information while withholding
the essentials is a job I would entrust to nobody but
you.” “Yet you confide much more in a boy who is incapable
of Occlumency, whose magic is mediocre, and who
has a direct connection into the Dark Lord’s mind!” “Voldemort fears that connection,” said Dumbledore.
“Not so long ago he had one small taste of what truly
sharing Harry’s mind means to him. It was pain such
as he has never experienced. He will not try to
possess Harry again, I am sure of it. Not in that way.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I don’t understand.” “Lord Voldemort’s soul, maimed as it is, cannot bear
close contact with a soul like Harry’s. Like a tongue
on frozen steel, like flesh in flame — ” “Souls? We were talking of minds!” “In the case of Harry and Lord Voldemort, to speak of
one is to speak of the other.” Dumbledore glanced around to make sure that they
were alone. They were close by the Forbidden Forest
now, but there was no sign of anyone near them. “After you have killed me, Severus — ” “You refuse to tell me everything, yet you expect that
small service of me!” snarled Snape, and real anger
flared in the thin face now. “You take a great deal for
granted, Dumbledore! Perhaps I have changed my
mind!” “You gave me your word, Severus. And while we are
talking about services you owe me, I thought you
agreed to keep a close eye on our young Slytherin
friend?” Snape looked angry, mutinous. Dumbledore sighed. “Come to my office tonight, Severus, at eleven, and
you shall not complain that I have no confidence in
you. ...” They were back in Dumbledore ’s office, the windows
dark, and Fawkes sat silent as Snape sat quite still,
as Dumbledore walked around him, talking.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Harry must not know, not until the last moment, not
until it is necessary, otherwise how could he have the
strength to do what must be done?” “But what must he do?” “That is between Harry and me. Now listen closely,
Severus. There will come a time — after my death —
do not argue, do not interrupt! There will come a time
when Lord Voldemort will seem to fear for the life of
his snake.” “For Nagini?” Snape looked astonished. “Precisely. If there comes a time when Lord Voldemort
stops sending that snake forth to do his bidding, but
keeps it safe beside him under magical protection,
then, I think, it will be safe to tell Harry.” “Tell him what?” Dumbledore took a deep breath and closed his eyes. “Tell him that on the night Lord Voldemort tried to kill
him, when Lily cast her own life between them as a
shield, the Killing Curse rebounded upon Lord
Voldemort, and a fragment of Voldemort’s soul was
blasted apart from the whole, and latched itself onto
the only living soul left in that collapsing building. Part of Lord Voldemort lives inside Harry, and it is
that which gives him the power of speech with
snakes, and a connection with Lord Voldemort’s mind
that he has never understood. And while that
fragment of soul, unmissed by Voldemort, remains
attached to and protected by Harry, Lord Voldemort
cannot die.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry seemed to be watching the two men from one
end of a long tunnel, they were so far away from him,
their voices echoing strangely in his ears. “So the boy . . . the boy must die?” asked Snape quite
calmly. “And Voldemort himself must do it, Severus. That is
essential.” Another long silence. Then Snape said, “I thought ...
all these years . . . that we were protecting him for her.
For Lily.” “We have protected him because it has been essential
to teach him, to raise him, to let him try his strength,”
said Dumbledore, his eyes still tight shut. “Meanwhile, the connection between them grows ever
stronger, a parasitic growth: Sometimes I have
thought he suspects it himself. If I know him, he will
have arranged matters so that when he does set out
to meet his death, it will truly mean the end of
Voldemort.” Dumbledore opened his eyes. Snape looked horrified. “You have kept him alive so that he can die at the
right moment?” “Don’t be shocked, Severus. How many men and
women have you watched die?” “Lately, only those whom I could not save,” said
Snape. He stood up. “You have used me.” “Meaning?” “I have spied for you and lied for you, put myself in
mortal danger for you. Everything was supposed to be  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
to keep Lily Potter’s son safe. Now you tell me you
have been raising him like a pig for slaughter — ” “But this is touching, Severus,” said Dumbledore
seriously. “Have you grown to care for the boy, after
all?” “For him?” shouted Snape. “Expecto Patronuml” From the tip of his wand burst the silver doe: She
landed on the office floor, bounded once across the
office, and soared out of the window. Dumbledore
watched her fly away, and as her silvery glow faded
he turned back to Snape, and his eyes were full of
tears. “After all this time?” “Always,” said Snape. And the scene shifted. Now, Harry saw Snape talking
to the portrait of Dumbledore behind his desk. “You will have to give Voldemort the correct date of
Harry’s departure from his aunt and uncle’s,” said
Dumbledore. “Not to do so will raise suspicion, when
Voldemort believes you so well informed. However,
you must plant the idea of decoys; that, I think, ought
to ensure Harry’s safety. Try Confunding Mundungus
Fletcher. And Severus, if you are forced to take part
in the chase, be sure to act your part convincingly. ... I am counting upon you to remain in Lord
Voldemort’s good books as long as possible, or
Hogwarts will be left to the mercy of the Carrows. ...” Now Snape was head to head with Mundungus in an
unfamiliar tavern, Mundungus ’s face looking
curiously blank, Snape frowning in concentration.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You will suggest to the Order of the Phoenix,” Snape
murmured, “that they use decoys. Polyjuice Potion.
Identical Potters. It is the only thing that might work.
You will forget that I have suggested this. You will
present it as your own idea. You understand?” “I understand,” murmured Mundungus, his eyes
unfocused. ... Now Harry was flying alongside Snape on a
broomstick through a clear dark night: He was
accompanied by other hooded Death Eaters, and
ahead were Lupin and a Harry who was really George.
... A Death Eater moved ahead of Snape and raised
his wand, pointing it directly at Lupin’s back — “ Sectumsemprcd” shouted Snape. But the spell, intended for the Death Eater’s wand
hand, missed and hit George instead — And next, Snape was kneeling in Sirius’s old
bedroom. Tears were dripping from the end of his
hooked nose as he read the old letter from Lily. The
second page carried only a few words: could ever have been friends with Gellert Grindelwald. I think her mind’s going, personally! Lots of love, Lily Snape took the page bearing Lily’s signature, and her
love, and tucked it inside his robes. Then he ripped in
two the photograph he was also holding, so that he
kept the part from which Lily laughed, throwing the
portion showing James and Harry back onto the floor,
under the chest of drawers. ...  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
And now Snape stood again in the headmaster’s
study as Phineas Nigellus came hurrying into his
portrait. “Headmaster! They are camping in the Forest of Dean!
The Mudblood — ” “Do not use that word!” “ — the Granger girl, then, mentioned the place as she
opened her bag and I heard her!” “Good. Very good!” cried the portrait of Dumbledore
behind the headmaster’s chair. “Now, Severus, the
sword! Do not forget that it must be taken under
conditions of need and valor — and he must not know
that you give it! If Voldemort should read Harry’s
mind and see you acting for him — ” “I know,” said Snape curtly. He approached the
portrait of Dumbledore and pulled at its side. It
swung forward, revealing a hidden cavity behind it
from which he took the sword of Gryffindor. “And you still aren’t going to tell me why it’s so
important to give Potter the sword?” said Snape as he
swung a traveling cloak over his robes. “No, I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore’s portrait. “He
will know what to do with it. And Severus, be very
careful, they may not take kindly to your appearance
after George Weasley’s mishap — ” Snape turned at the door. “Don’t worry, Dumbledore,” he said coolly. “I have a
plan. ...”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
And Snape left the room. Harry rose up out of the
Pensieve, and moments later he lay on the carpeted
floor in exactly the same room: Snape might just have
closed the door.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE FOREST AGAIN Finally, the truth. Lying with his face pressed into the
dusty carpet of the office where he had once thought
he was learning the secrets of victory, Harry
understood at last that he was not supposed to
survive. His job was to walk calmly into Death’s
welcoming arms. Along the way, he was to dispose of
Voldemort’s remaining links to life, so that when at
last he flung himself across Voldemort’s path, and did
not raise a wand to defend himself, the end would be
clean, and the job that ought to have been done in
Godric’s Hollow would be finished: Neither would live,
neither could survive. He felt his heart pounding fiercely in his chest. How
strange that in his dread of death, it pumped all the
harder, valiantly keeping him alive. But it would have
to stop, and soon. Its beats were numbered. How
many would there be time for, as he rose and walked
through the castle for the last time, out into the
grounds and into the forest?  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling Terror washed over him as he lay on the floor, with
that funeral drum pounding inside him. Would it hurt
to die? All those times he had thought that it was
about to happen and escaped, he had never really
thought of the thing itself: His will to live had always
been so much stronger than his fear of death. Yet it
did not occur to him now to try to escape, to outrun
Voldemort. It was over, he knew it, and all that was
left was the thing itself: dying. If he could only have died on that summer’s night
when he had left number four, Privet Drive, for the
last time, when the noble phoenix-feather wand had
saved him! If he could only have died like Hedwig, so
quickly he would not have known it had happened! Or if he could have launched himself in front of a
wand to save someone he loved. ... He envied even his
parents’ deaths now. This cold-blooded walk to his
own destruction would require a different kind of
bravery. He felt his fingers trembling slightly and
made an effort to control them, although no one could
see him; the portraits on the walls were all empty. Slowly, very slowly, he sat up, and as he did so he felt
more alive and more aware of his own living body
than ever before. Why had he never appreciated what
a miracle he was, brain and nerve and bounding
heart? It would all be gone ... or at least, he would be
gone from it. His breath came slow and deep, and his
mouth and throat were completely dry, but so were
his eyes. Dumbledore’s betrayal was almost nothing. Of course
there had been a bigger plan; Harry had simply been
too foolish to see it, he realized that now. He had
never questioned his own assumption that
Dumbledore wanted him alive. Now he saw that his
life span had always been determined by how long it
took to eliminate all the Horcruxes. Dumbledore had Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
passed the job of destroying them to him, and
obediently he had continued to chip away at the
bonds tying not only Voldemort, but himself, to life!
How neat, how elegant, not to waste any more lives,
but to give the dangerous task to the boy who had
already been marked for slaughter, and whose death
would not be a calamity, but another blow against
Voldemort. And Dumbledore had known that Harry would not
duck out, that he would keep going to the end, even
though it was his end, because he had taken trouble
to get to know him, hadn’t he? Dumbledore knew, as
Voldemort knew, that Harry would not let anyone else
die for him now that he had discovered it was in his
power to stop it. The images of Fred, Lupin, and
Tonks lying dead in the Great Hall forced their way
back into his mind’s eye, and for a moment he could
hardly breathe: Death was impatient. ... But Dumbledore had overestimated him. He had
failed: The snake survived. One Horcrux remained to
bind Voldemort to the earth, even after Harry had
been killed. True, that would mean an easier job for
somebody. He wondered who would do it. ... Ron and
Hermione would know what needed to be done, of
course. ... That would have been why Dumbledore
wanted him to confide in two others ... so that if he
fulfilled his true destiny a little early, they could carry
on. ... Like rain on a cold window, these thoughts pattered
against the hard surface of the incontrovertible truth,
which was that he must die. I must die. It must end. Ron and Hermione seemed a long way away, in a far-
off country; he felt as though he had parted from
them long ago. There would be no good-byes and no
explanations, he was determined of that. This was a  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
journey they could not take together, and the
attempts they would make to stop him would waste
valuable time. He looked down at the battered gold
watch he had received on his seventeenth birthday.
Nearly half of the hour allotted by Voldemort for his
surrender had elapsed. He stood up. His heart was leaping against his ribs
like a frantic bird. Perhaps it knew it had little time
left, perhaps it was determined to fulfill a lifetime’s
beats before the end. He did not look back as he
closed the office door. The castle was empty. He felt ghostly striding through
it alone, as if he had already died. The portrait people
were still missing from their frames; the whole place
was eerily still, as if all its remaining lifeblood were
concentrated in the Great Hall where the dead and
the mourners were crammed. Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak over himself and
descended through the floors, at last walking down
the marble staircase into the entrance hall. Perhaps
some tiny part of him hoped to be sensed, to be seen,
to be stopped, but the Cloak was, as ever,
impenetrable, perfect, and he reached the front doors
easily. Then Neville nearly walked into him. He was one half
of a pair that was carrying a body in from the
grounds. Harry glanced down and felt another dull
blow to his stomach: Colin Creevey, though underage,
must have sneaked back just as Malfoy, Crabbe, and
Goyle had done. He was tiny in death. “You know what? I can manage him alone, Neville,”
said Oliver Wood, and he heaved Colin over his
shoulder in a fireman’s lift and carried him into the
Great Hall.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Neville leaned against the door frame for a moment
and wiped his forehead with the back of his hand. He
looked like an old man. Then he set off down the
steps again into the darkness to recover more bodies. Harry took one glance back at the entrance of the
Great Hall. People were moving around, trying to
comfort each other, drinking, kneeling beside the
dead, but he could not see any of the people he loved,
no hint of Hermione, Ron, Ginny, or any of the other
Weasleys, no Luna. He felt he would have given all the
time remaining to him for just one last look at them;
but then, would he ever have the strength to stop
looking? It was better like this. He moved down the steps and out into the darkness. It was nearly four in the morning, and the deathly
stillness of the grounds felt as though they were
holding their breath, waiting to see whether he could
do what he must. Harry moved toward Neville, who was bending over
another body. “Neville.” “Blimey, Harry, you nearly gave me heart failure!” Harry had pulled off the Cloak: The idea had come to
him out of nowhere, born out of a desire to make
absolutely sure. “Where are you going, alone?” Neville asked
suspiciously. “It’s all part of the plan,” said Harry. “There’s
something I’ve got to do. Listen — Neville — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Harry!” Neville looked suddenly scared. “Harry,
you’re not thinking of handing yourself over?” “No,” Harry lied easily. “ ’Course not ... this is
something else. But I might be out of sight for a while.
You know Voldemort’s snake, Neville? He’s got a huge
snake. ... Calls it Nagini ...” “I’ve heard, yeah. ... What about it?” “It’s got to be killed. Ron and Hermione know that,
but just in case they — ” The awfulness of that possibility smothered him for a
moment, made it impossible to keep talking. But he
pulled himself together again: This was crucial, he
must be like Dumbledore, keep a cool head, make
sure there were backups, others to carry on.
Dumbledore had died knowing that three people still
knew about the Horcruxes; now Neville would take
Harry’s place: There would still be three in the secret. “Just in case they’re — busy — and you get the
chance — ” “Kill the snake?” “Kill the snake,” Harry repeated. “All right, Harry. You’re okay, are you?” “I’m fine. Thanks, Neville.” But Neville seized his wrist as Harry made to move
on. “We’re all going to keep fighting, Harry. You know
that?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Yeah, I — ” The suffocating feeling extinguished the end of the
sentence; he could not go on. Neville did not seem to
find it strange. He patted Harry on the shoulder,
released him, and walked away to look for more
bodies. Harry swung the Cloak back over himself and walked
on. Someone else was moving not far away, stooping
over another prone figure on the ground. He was feet
away from her when he realized it was Ginny. He stopped in his tracks. She was crouching over a
girl who was whispering for her mother. “It’s all right,” Ginny was saying. “It’s okay. We’re
going to get you inside.” “But I want to go home,” whispered the girl. “I don’t
want to fight anymore!” “I know,” said Ginny, and her voice broke. “It’s going
to be all right.” Ripples of cold undulated over Harry’s skin. He
wanted to shout out to the night, he wanted Ginny to
know that he was there, he wanted her to know where
he was going. He wanted to be stopped, to be dragged
back, to be sent back home. ... But he was home. Hogwarts was the first and best
home he had known. He and Voldemort and Snape,
the abandoned boys, had all found home here. ... Ginny was kneeling beside the injured girl now,
holding her hand. With a huge effort Harry forced
himself on. He thought he saw Ginny look around as
he passed, and wondered whether she had sensed  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
someone walking nearby, but he did not speak, and
he did not look back. Hagrid’s hut loomed out of the darkness. There were
no lights, no sound of Fang scrabbling at the door,
his bark booming in welcome. All those visits to
Hagrid, and the gleam of the copper kettle on the fire,
and rock cakes and giant grubs, and his great
bearded face, and Ron vomiting slugs, and Hermione
helping him save Norbert ... He moved on, and now he reached the edge of the
forest, and he stopped. A swarm of dementors was gliding amongst the trees;
he could feel their chill, and he was not sure he would
be able to pass safely through it. He had no strength
left for a Patronus. He could no longer control his own
trembling. It was not, after all, so easy to die. Every
second he breathed, the smell of the grass, the cool
air on his face, was so precious: To think that people
had years and years, time to waste, so much time it
dragged, and he was clinging to each second. At the
same time he thought that he would not be able to go
on, and knew that he must. The long game was
ended, the Snitch had been caught, it was time to
leave the air. ... The Snitch. His nerveless fingers fumbled for a
moment with the pouch at his neck and he pulled it
out. I open at the close. Breathing fast and hard, he stared down at it. Now
that he wanted time to move as slowly as possible, it
seemed to have sped up, and understanding was
coming so fast it seemed to have bypassed thought.
This was the close. This was the moment.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
He pressed the golden metal to his lips and
whispered, “I am about to die.” The metal shell broke open. He lowered his shaking
hand, raised Draco’s wand beneath the Cloak, and
murmured, “Lumos.” The black stone with its jagged crack running down
the center sat in the two halves of the Snitch. The
Resurrection Stone had cracked down the vertical line
representing the Elder Wand. The triangle and circle
representing the Cloak and the stone were still
discernible. And again Harry understood without having to think.
It did not matter about bringing them back, for he
was about to join them. He was not really fetching
them: They were fetching him. He closed his eyes and turned the stone over in his
hand three times. He knew it had happened, because he heard slight
movements around him that suggested frail bodies
shifting their footing on the earthy, twig- strewn
ground that marked the outer edge of the forest. He
opened his eyes and looked around. They were neither ghost nor truly flesh, he could see
that. They resembled most closely the Riddle that had
escaped from the diary so long ago, and he had been
memory made nearly solid. Less substantial than
living bodies, but much more than ghosts, they
moved toward him, and on each face, there was the
same loving smile. James was exactly the same height as Harry. He was
wearing the clothes in which he had died, and his  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
hair was untidy and ruffled, and his glasses were a
little lopsided, like Mr. Weasley’s. Sirius was tall and handsome, and younger by far
than Harry had seen him in life. He loped with an
easy grace, his hands in his pockets and a grin on his
face. Lupin was younger too, and much less shabby, and
his hair was thicker and darker. He looked happy to
be back in this familiar place, scene of so many
adolescent wanderings. Lily’s smile was widest of all. She pushed her long
hair back as she drew close to him, and her green
eyes, so like his, searched his face hungrily, as
though she would never be able to look at him
enough. “You’ve been so brave.” He could not speak. His eyes feasted on her, and he
thought that he would like to stand and look at her
forever, and that would be enough. “You are nearly there,” said James. “Very close. We
are ... so proud of you.” “Does it hurt?” The childish question had fallen from Harry’s lips
before he could stop it. “Dying? Not at all,” said Sirius. “Quicker and easier
than falling asleep.” “And he will want it to be quick. He wants it over,”
said Lupin.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I didn’t want you to die,” Harry said. These words
came without his volition. “Any of you. I’m sorry — ” He addressed Lupin more than any of them,
beseeching him. “ — right after you’d had your son ... Remus, I’m sorry “I am sorry too,” said Lupin. “Sorry I will never know
him . . . but he will know why I died and I hope he will
understand. I was trying to make a world in which he
could live a happier life.” A chilly breeze that seemed to emanate from the heart
of the forest lifted the hair at Harry’s brow. He knew
that they would not tell him to go, that it would have
to be his decision. “You’ll stay with me?” “Until the very end,” said James. “They won’t be able to see you?” asked Harry. “We are part of you,” said Sirius. “Invisible to anyone
else.” Harry looked at his mother. “Stay close to me,” he said quietly. And he set off. The dementors’ chill did not overcome
him; he passed through it with his companions, and
they acted like Patronuses to him, and together they
marched through the old trees that grew closely
together, their branches tangled, their roots gnarled
and twisted underfoot. Harry clutched the Cloak
tightly around him in the darkness, traveling deeper Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
and deeper into the forest, with no idea where exactly
Voldemort was, but sure that he would find him.
Beside him, making scarcely a sound, walked James,
Sirius, Lupin, and Lily, and their presence was his
courage, and the reason he was able to keep putting
one foot in front of the other. His body and mind felt oddly disconnected now, his
limbs working without conscious instruction, as if he
were passenger, not driver, in the body he was about
to leave. The dead who walked beside him through
the forest were much more real to him now than the
living back at the castle: Ron, Hermione, Ginny, and
all the others were the ones who felt like ghosts as he
stumbled and slipped toward the end of his life,
toward Voldemort. ... A thud and a whisper: Some other living creature had
stirred close by. Harry stopped under the Cloak,
peering around, listening, and his mother and father,
Lupin and Sirius stopped too. “Someone there,” came a rough whisper close at
hand. “He’s got an Invisibility Cloak. Could it be — ?” Two figures emerged from behind a nearby tree: Their
wands flared, and Harry saw Yaxley and Dolohov
peering into the darkness, directly at the place Harry,
his mother and father and Sirius and Lupin stood.
Apparently they could not see anything. “Definitely heard something,” said Yaxley. “Animal,
d’you reckon?” “That head case Hagrid kept a whole bunch of stuff in
here,” said Dolohov, glancing over his shoulder. Yaxley looked down at his watch.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Time’s nearly up. Potter’s had his hour. He’s not
coming.” “And he was sure he’d come! He won’t be happy.” “Better go back,” said Yaxley. “Find out what the plan
is now.” He and Dolohov turned and walked deeper into the
forest. Harry followed them, knowing that they would
lead him exactly where he wanted to go. He glanced
sideways, and his mother smiled at him, and his
father nodded encouragement. They had traveled on mere minutes when Harry saw
light ahead, and Yaxley and Dolohov stepped out into
a clearing that Harry knew had been the place where
the monstrous Aragog had once lived. The remnants
of his vast web were there still, but the swarm of
descendants he had spawned had been driven out by
the Death Eaters, to fight for their cause. A fire burned in the middle of the clearing, and its
flickering light fell over a crowd of completely silent,
watchful Death Eaters. Some of them were still
masked and hooded; others showed their faces. Two
giants sat on the outskirts of the group, casting
massive shadows over the scene, their faces cruel,
rough-hewn like rock. Harry saw Fenrir, skulking,
chewing his long nails; the great blond Rowle was
dabbing at his bleeding lip. He saw Lucius Malfoy,
who looked defeated and terrified, and Narcissa,
whose eyes were sunken and full of apprehension. Every eye was fixed upon Voldemort, who stood with
his head bowed, and his white hands folded over the
Elder Wand in front of him. He might have been
praying, or else counting silently in his mind, and
Harry, standing still on the edge of the scene, thought Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
absurdly of a child counting in a game of hide-and-
seek. Behind his head, still swirling and coiling, the
great snake Nagini floated in her glittering, charmed
cage, like a monstrous halo. When Dolohov and Yaxley rejoined the circle,
Voldemort looked up. “No sign of him, my Lord,” said Dolohov. Voldemort ’s expression did not change. The red eyes
seemed to burn in the firelight. Slowly he drew the
Elder Wand between his long fingers. “My Lord — ” Bellatrix had spoken: She sat closest to Voldemort,
disheveled, her face a little bloody but otherwise
unharmed. Voldemort raised his hand to silence her, and she did
not speak another word, but eyed him in worshipful
fascination. “I thought he would come,” said Voldemort in his
high, clear voice, his eyes on the leaping flames. “I
expected him to come.” Nobody spoke. They seemed as scared as Harry,
whose heart was now throwing itself against his ribs
as though determined to escape the body he was
about to cast aside. His hands were sweating as he
pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and stuffed it beneath
his robes, with his wand. He did not want to be
tempted to fight. “I was, it seems ... mistaken,” said Voldemort. “You weren’t.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry said it as loudly as he could, with all the force
he could muster: He did not want to sound afraid. The Resurrection Stone slipped from between his
numb fingers, and out of the corner of his eyes he
saw his parents, Sirius, and Lupin vanish as he
stepped forward into the firelight. At that moment he
felt that nobody mattered but Voldemort. It was just
the two of them. The illusion was gone as soon as it had come. The
giants roared as the Death Eaters rose together, and
there were many cries, gasps, even laughter.
Voldemort had frozen where he stood, but his red
eyes had found Harry, and he stared as Harry moved
toward him, with nothing but the fire between them. Then a voice yelled: “HARRY! NO!” He turned: Hagrid was bound and trussed, tied to a
tree nearby. His massive body shook the branches
overhead as he struggled, desperate. “NO! NO! HARRY, WHAT’RE YEH — ?” “QUIET!” shouted Rowle, and with a flick of his wand
Hagrid was silenced. Bellatrix, who had leapt to her feet, was looking
eagerly from Voldemort to Harry, her breast heaving.
The only things that moved were the flames and the
snake, coiling and uncoiling in the glittering cage
behind Voldemort’s head. Harry could feel his wand against his chest, but he
made no attempt to draw it. He knew that the snake
was too well protected, knew that if he managed to
point the wand at Nagini, fifty curses would hit him
first. And still, Voldemort and Harry looked at each
other, and now Voldemort tilted his head a little to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
the side, considering the boy standing before him,
and a singularly mirthless smile curled the lipless
mouth. “Harry Potter,” he said very softly. His voice might
have been part of the spitting fire. “The Boy Who
Lived.” None of the Death Eaters moved. They were waiting:
Everything was waiting. Hagrid was struggling, and
Bellatrix was panting, and Harry thought inexplicably
of Ginny, and her blazing look, and the feel of her lips
on his — Voldemort had raised his wand. His head was still
tilted to one side, like a curious child, wondering what
would happen if he proceeded. Harry looked back into
the red eyes, and wanted it to happen now, quickly,
while he could still stand, before he lost control,
before he betrayed fear — He saw the mouth move and a flash of green light,
and everything was gone.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling KING’S CROSS He lay facedown, listening to the silence. He was
perfectly alone. Nobody was watching. Nobody else
was there. He was not perfectly sure that he was
there himself. A long time later, or maybe no time at all, it came to
him that he must exist, must be more than
disembodied thought, because he was lying, definitely
lying, on some surface. Therefore he had a sense of
touch, and the thing against which he lay existed too. Almost as soon as he had reached this conclusion,
Harry became conscious that he was naked.
Convinced as he was of his total solitude, this did not
concern him, but it did intrigue him slightly. He
wondered whether, as he could feel, he would be able
to see. In opening them, he discovered that he had
eyes. He lay in a bright mist, though it was not like mist he
had ever experienced before. His surroundings were
not hidden by cloudy vapor; rather the cloudy vapor  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling had not yet formed into surroundings. The floor on
which he lay seemed to be white, neither warm nor
cold, but simply there, a flat, blank something on
which to be. He sat up. His body appeared unscathed. He touched
his face. He was not wearing glasses anymore. Then a noise reached him through the unformed
nothingness that surrounded him: the small soft
thumpings of something that flapped, flailed, and
struggled. It was a pitiful noise, yet also slightly
indecent. He had the uncomfortable feeling that he
was eavesdropping on something furtive, shameful. For the first time, he wished he were clothed. Barely had the wish formed in his head than robes
appeared a short distance away. He took them and
pulled them on: They were soft, clean, and warm. It
was extraordinary how they had appeared, just like
that, the moment he had wanted them. ... He stood up, looking around. Was he in some great
Room of Requirement? The longer he looked, the more
there was to see. A great domed glass roof glittered
high above him in sunlight. Perhaps it was a palace.
All was hushed and still, except for those odd
thumping and whimpering noises coming from
somewhere close by in the mist. ... Harry turned slowly on the spot, and his
surroundings seemed to invent themselves before his
eyes. A wide-open space, bright and clean, a hall
larger by far than the Great Hall, with that clear,
domed glass ceiling. It was quite empty. He was the
only person there, except for —  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
He recoiled. He had spotted the thing that was
making the noises. It had the form of a small, naked
child, curled on the ground, its skin raw and rough,
flayed-looking, and it lay shuddering under a seat
where it had been left, unwanted, stuffed out of sight,
struggling for breath. He was afraid of it. Small and fragile and wounded
though it was, he did not want to approach it.
Nevertheless he drew slowly nearer, ready to jump
back at any moment. Soon he stood near enough to
touch it, yet he could not bring himself to do it. He
felt like a coward. He ought to comfort it, but it
repulsed him. “You cannot help.” He spun around. Albus Dumbledore was walking
toward him, sprightly and upright, wearing sweeping
robes of midnight blue. “Harry.” He spread his arms wide, and his hands were
both whole and white and undamaged. “You
wonderful boy. You brave, brave man. Let us walk.” Stunned, Harry followed as Dumbledore strode away
from where the flayed child lay whimpering, leading
him to two seats that Harry had not previously
noticed, set some distance away under that high,
sparkling ceiling. Dumbledore sat down in one of
them, and Harry fell into the other, staring at his old
headmaster’s face. Dumbledore ’s long silver hair and
beard, the piercingly blue eyes behind half-moon
spectacles, the crooked nose: Everything was as he
had remembered it. And yet... “But you’re dead,” said Harry. “Oh yes,” said Dumbledore matter-of-factly.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Then ... I’m dead too?” “Ah,” said Dumbledore, smiling still more broadly.
“That is the question, isn’t it? On the whole, dear boy,
I think not.” They looked at each other, the old man still beaming.
“Not?” repeated Harry. “Not,” said Dumbledore. “But ...” Harry raised his hand instinctively toward
the lightning scar. It did not seem to be there. “But I
should have died — I didn’t defend myself! I meant to
let him kill me!” “And that,” said Dumbledore, “will, I think, have
made all the difference.” Happiness seemed to radiate from Dumbledore like
light, like fire: Harry had never seen the man so
utterly, so palpably content. “Explain,” said Harry. “But you already know,” said Dumbledore. He
twiddled his thumbs together. “I let him kill me,” said Harry. “Didn’t I?” “You did,” said Dumbledore, nodding. “Go on!” “So the part of his soul that was in me ...” Dumbledore nodded still more enthusiastically,
urging Harry onward, a broad smile of encouragement
on his face.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
"... has it gone?” “Oh yes!” said Dumbledore. “Yes, he destroyed it. Your soul is whole, and completely your own, Harry.” “But then ...” Harry glanced over his shoulder to where the small,
maimed creature trembled under the chair. “What is that, Professor?” “Something that is beyond either of our help,” said
Dumbledore. “But if Voldemort used the Killing Curse,” Harry
started again, “and nobody died for me this time —
how can I be alive?” “I think you know,” said Dumbledore. “Think back.
Remember what he did, in his ignorance, in his greed
and his cruelty.” Harry thought. He let his gaze drift over his
surroundings. If it was indeed a palace in which they
sat, it was an odd one, with chairs set in little rows
and bits of railing here and there, and still, he and
Dumbledore and the stunted creature under the chair
were the only beings there. Then the answer rose to
his lips easily, without effort. “He took my blood,” said Harry. “Precisely!” said Dumbledore. “He took your blood and
rebuilt his living body with it! Your blood in his veins,
Harry, Lily’s protection inside both of you! He tethered
you to life while he lives!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I live . . . while he lives? But I thought ... I thought it
was the other way round! I thought we both had to
die? Or is it the same thing?” He was distracted by the whimpering and thumping
of the agonized creature behind them and glanced
back at it yet again. “Are you sure we can’t do anything?” “There is no help possible.” “Then explain ... more,” said Harry, and Dumbledore
smiled. “You were the seventh Horcrux, Harry, the Horcrux
he never meant to make. He had rendered his soul so
unstable that it broke apart when he committed those
acts of unspeakable evil, the murder of your parents,
the attempted killing of a child. But what escaped
from that room was even less than he knew. He left
more than his body behind. He left part of himself
latched to you, the would-be victim who had survived. “And his knowledge remained woefully incomplete,
Harry! That which Voldemort does not value, he takes
no trouble to comprehend. Of house-elves and
children’s tales, of love, loyalty, and innocence,
Voldemort knows and understands nothing. Nothing.
That they all have a power beyond his own, a power
beyond the reach of any magic, is a truth he has
never grasped. “He took your blood believing it would strengthen
him. He took into his body a tiny part of the
enchantment your mother laid upon you when she
died for you. His body keeps her sacrifice alive, and
while that enchantment survives, so do you and so
does Voldemort’s one last hope for himself.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Dumbledore smiled at Harry, and Harry stared at
him. “And you knew this? You knew — all along?” “I guessed. But my guesses have usually been good,”
said Dumbledore happily, and they sat in silence for
what seemed like a long time, while the creature
behind them continued to whimper and tremble. “There’s more,” said Harry. “There’s more to it. Why
did my wand break the wand he borrowed?” “As to that, I cannot be sure.” “Have a guess, then,” said Harry, and Dumbledore
laughed. “What you must understand, Harry, is that you and
Lord Voldemort have journeyed together into realms
of magic hitherto unknown and untested. But here is
what I think happened, and it is unprecedented, and
no wandmaker could, I think, ever have predicted it
or explained it to Voldemort. “Without meaning to, as you now know, Lord
Voldemort doubled the bond between you when he
returned to a human form. A part of his soul was still
attached to yours, and, thinking to strengthen
himself, he took a part of your mother’s sacrifice into
himself. If he could only have understood the precise
and terrible power of that sacrifice, he would not,
perhaps, have dared to touch your blood. ... But then,
if he had been able to understand, he could not be
Lord Voldemort, and might never have murdered at
all. “Having ensured this two-fold connection, having
wrapped your destinies together more securely than  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
ever two wizards were joined in history, Voldemort
proceeded to attack you with a wand that shared a
core with yours. And now something very strange
happened, as we know. The cores reacted in a way
that Lord Voldemort, who never knew that your wand
was twin of his, had never expected. “He was more afraid than you were that night, Harry.
You had accepted, even embraced, the possibility of
death, something Lord Voldemort has never been able
to do. Your courage won, your wand overpowered his.
And in doing so, something happened between those
wands, something that echoed the relationship
between their masters. “I believe that your wand imbibed some of the power
and qualities of Voldemort’s wand that night, which is
to say that it contained a little of Voldemort himself.
So your wand recognized him when he pursued you,
recognized a man who was both kin and mortal
enemy, and it regurgitated some of his own magic
against him, magic much more powerful than
anything Lucius’s wand had ever performed. Your
wand now contained the power of your enormous
courage and of Voldemort’s own deadly skill: What
chance did that poor stick of Lucius Malfoy’s stand?” “But if my wand was so powerful, how come
Hermione was able to break it?” asked Harry. “My dear boy, its remarkable effects were directed
only at Voldemort, who had tampered so ill-advisedly
with the deepest laws of magic. Only toward him was
that wand abnormally powerful. Otherwise it was a
wand like any other ... though a good one, I am sure,”
Dumbledore finished kindly.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry sat in thought for a long time, or perhaps
seconds. It was very hard to be sure of things like
time, here. “He killed me with your wand.” “He failed to kill you with my wand,” Dumbledore
corrected Harry. “I think we can agree that you are
not dead — though, of course,” he added, as if fearing
he had been discourteous, “I do not minimize your
sufferings, which I am sure were severe.” “I feel great at the moment, though,” said Harry,
looking down at his clean, unblemished hands.
“Where are we, exactly?” “Well, I was going to ask you that,” said Dumbledore,
looking around. “Where would you say that we are?” Until Dumbledore had asked, Harry had not known.
Now, however, he found that he had an answer ready
to give. “It looks,” he said slowly, “like King’s Cross station.
Except a lot cleaner and empty, and there are no
trains as far as I can see.” “King’s Cross station!” Dumbledore was chuckling
immoderately. “Good gracious, really?” “Well, where do you think we are?” asked Harry, a
little defensively. “My dear boy, I have no idea. This is, as they say,
your party.” Harry had no idea what this meant; Dumbledore was
being infuriating. He glared at him, then remembered  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
a much more pressing question than that of their
current location. “The Deathly Hallows,” he said, and he was glad to
see that the words wiped the smile from
Dumbledore’s face. “Ah, yes,” he said. He even looked a little worried.
“Well?” For the first time since Harry had met Dumbledore,
he looked less than an old man, much less. He looked
fleetingly like a small boy caught in wrongdoing. “Can you forgive me?” he said. “Can you forgive me
for not trusting you? For not telling you? Harry, I only
feared that you would fail as I had failed. I only
dreaded that you would make my mistakes. I crave
your pardon, Harry. I have known, for some time now,
that you are the better man.” “What are you talking about?” asked Harry, startled
by Dumbledore’s tone, by the sudden tears in his
eyes. “The Hallows, the Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore.
“A desperate man’s dream!” “But they’re real!” “Real, and dangerous, and a lure for fools,” said
Dumbledore. “And I was such a fool. But you know,
don’t you? I have no secrets from you anymore. You
know.” “What do I know?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Dumbledore turned his whole body to face Harry, and
tears still sparkled in the brilliantly blue eyes. “Master of death, Harry, master of Death! Was I
better, ultimately, than Voldemort?” “Of course you were,” said Harry. “Of course — how
can you ask that? You never killed if you could avoid
it!” “True, true,” said Dumbledore, and he was like a
child seeking reassurance. “Yet I too sought a way to
conquer death, Harry.” “Not the way he did,” said Harry. After all his anger at
Dumbledore, how odd it was to sit here, beneath the
high, vaulted ceiling, and defend Dumbledore from
himself. “Hallows, not Horcruxes.” “Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore, “not Horcruxes.
Precisely.” There was a pause. The creature behind them
whimpered, but Harry no longer looked around. “Grindelwald was looking for them too?” he asked. Dumbledore closed his eyes for a moment and
nodded. “It was the thing, above all, that drew us together,” he
said quietly. “Two clever, arrogant boys with a shared
obsession. He wanted to come to Godric’s Hollow, as I
am sure you have guessed, because of the grave of
Ignotus Peverell. He wanted to explore the place the
third brother had died.” “So it’s true?” asked Harry. “All of it? The Peverell
brothers — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ — were the three brothers of the tale,” said
Dumbledore, nodding. “Oh yes, I think so. Whether
they met Death on a lonely road ... I think it more
likely that the Peverell brothers were simply gifted,
dangerous wizards who succeeded in creating those
powerful objects. The story of them being Death’s own
Hallows seems to me the sort of legend that might
have sprung up around such creations. “The Cloak, as you know now, traveled down through
the ages, father to son, mother to daughter, right
down to Ignotus’s last living descendant, who was
born, as Ignotus was, in the village of Godric’s
Hollow.” Dumbledore smiled at Harry. “Me?” “You. You have guessed, I know, why the Cloak was
in my possession on the night your parents died.
James had showed it to me just a few days
previously. It explained much of his undetected
wrong-doing at school! I could hardly believe what I
was seeing. I asked to borrow it, to examine it. I had
long since given up my dream of uniting the Hallows,
but I could not resist, could not help taking a closer
look. ... It was a Cloak the likes of which I had never
seen, immensely old, perfect in every respect . . . and
then your father died, and I had two Hallows at last,
all to myself!” His tone was unbearably bitter.
“And they’d love to have me,” said Harry sarcastically.
“We’d be best pals if they didn’t keep trying to do me in. This made Ron laugh; even Hermione gave a grudging
smile, and a distraction arrived in the shape of Ginny. “Hey, Harry, I’m supposed to give you this.” It was a scroll of parchment with Harry’s name
written upon it in familiar thin, slanting writing. “Thanks, Ginny ... It’s Dumbledore’s next lesson!”
Harry told Ron and Hermione, pulling open the
parchment and quickly reading its contents. “Monday
evening!” He felt suddenly light and happy. “Want to
join us in Hogsmeade, Ginny?” he asked. “I’m going with Dean — might see you there,” she
replied, waving at them as she left. Filch was standing at the oak front doors as usual,
checking off the names of people who had permission
to go into Hogsmeade. The process took even longer
than normal as Filch was triple-checking everybody
with his Secrecy Sensor. “What does it matter if we’re smuggling Dark stuff
OUT?” demanded Ron, eyeing the long thin Secrecy
Sensor with apprehension. “Surely you ought to be
checking what we bring back IN?” His cheek earned him a few extra jabs with the
Sensor, and he was still wincing as they stepped out
into the wind and sleet. The walk into Hogsmeade was not enjoyable. Harry
wrapped his scarf over his lower face; the exposed
part soon felt both raw and numb. The road to the
village was full of students bent double against the
bitter wind. More than once Harry wondered whether
they might not have had a better time in the warm
common room, and when they finally reached
Hogsmeade and saw that Zonko’s Joke Shop had
been boarded up, Harry took it as confirmation that
this trip was not destined to be fun. Ron pointed, with
a thickly gloved hand, toward Honeydukes, which was
mercifully open, and Harry and Hermione staggered
in his wake into the crowded shop. “Thank God,” shivered Ron as they were enveloped by
warm, toffee-scented air. “Let’s stay here all
afternoon.” “Harry, m’boy!” said a booming voice from behind
them. “Oh no,” muttered Harry. The three of them turned to
see Professor Slughorn, who was wearing an
enormous furry hat and an overcoat with matching
fur collar, clutching a large bag of crystalized
pineapple, and occupying at least a quarter of the
shop. “Harry, that’s three of my little suppers you’ve missed
now!” said Slughorn, poking him genially in the chest.
“It won’t do, m’boy, I’m determined to have you! Miss
Granger loves them, don’t you?” “Yes,” said Hermione helplessly, “they’re really — ” “So why don’t you come along, Harry?” demanded
Slughorn. “Well, I’ve had Quidditch practice, Professor,” said
Harry, who had indeed been scheduling practices
every time Slughorn had sent him a little, violet
ribbon-adorned invitation. This strategy meant that
Ron was not left out, and they usually had a laugh
with Ginny, imagining Hermione shut up with
McLaggen and Zabini. “Well, I certainly expect you to win your first match
after all this hard work!” said Slughorn. “But a little
recreation never hurt anybody. Now, how about
Monday night, you can’t possibly want to practice in
this weather. ...” “I can’t, Professor, I’ve got — er — an appointment
with Professor Dumbledore that evening.” “Unlucky again!” cried Slughorn dramatically. “Ah,
well ... you can’t evade me forever, Harry!” And with a regal wave, he waddled out of the shop,
taking as little notice of Ron as though he had been a
display of Cockroach Clusters. “I can’t believe you’ve wriggled out of another one,”
said Hermione, shaking her head. “They’re not that
bad, you know. ... They’re even quite fun sometimes.
...” But then she caught sight of Ron’s expression. “Oh, look — they’ve got deluxe sugar quills — those
would last hours!” Glad that Hermione had changed the subject, Harry
showed much more interest in the new extra-large
sugar quills than he would normally have done, but
Ron continued to look moody and merely shrugged
when Hermione asked him where he wanted to go
next. “Let’s go to the Three Broomsticks,” said Harry. “It’ll
be warm.” They bundled their scarves back over their faces and
left the sweetshop. The bitter wind was like knives on
their faces after the sugary warmth of Honeydukes.
The street was not very busy; nobody was lingering to
chat, just hurrying toward their destinations. The
exceptions were two men a little ahead of them,
standing just outside the Three Broomsticks. One was
very tall and thin; squinting through his rain-washed
glasses Harry recognized the barman who worked in
the other Hogsmeade pub, the Hog’s Head. As Harry,
Ron, and Hermione drew closer, the barman drew his
cloak more tightly around his neck and walked away,
leaving the shorter man to fumble with something in
his arms. They were barely feet from him when Harry
realized who the man was. “Mundungus!” The squat, bandy-legged man with long, straggly,
ginger hair jumped and dropped an ancient suitcase,
which burst open, releasing what looked like the
entire contents of a junk shop window. “Oh, ’ello, ’Arry,” said Mundungus Fletcher, with a
most unconvincing stab at airiness. “Well, don’t let
me keep ya.” And he began scrabbling on the ground to retrieve the
contents of his suitcase with every appearance of a
man eager to be gone. “Are you selling this stuff?” asked Harry, watching
Mundungus grab an assortment of grubby-looking
objects from the ground. “Oh, well, gotta scrape a living,” said Mundungus.
“Gimme that!” Ron had stooped down and picked up something
silver.
“Hang on,” Ron said slowly. “This looks familiar — ” “Thank you!” said Mundungus, snatching the goblet
out of Ron’s hand and stuffing it back into the case.
“Well, I’ll see you all — OUCH!” Harry had pinned Mundungus against the wall of the
pub by the throat. Holding him fast with one hand, he
pulled out his wand. “Harry!” squealed Hermione. “You took that from Sirius’s house,” said Harry, who
was almost nose to nose with Mundungus and was
breathing in an unpleasant smell of old tobacco and
spirits. “That had the Black family crest on it.” “I — no — what — ?” spluttered Mundungus, who
was slowly turning purple. “What did you do, go back the night he died and strip
the place?” snarled Harry. “I — no — ” “Give it to me!” “Harry, you mustn’t!” shrieked Hermione, as
Mundungus started to turn blue. There was a bang, and Harry felt his hands fly off
Mundungus’s throat. Gasping and spluttering,
Mundungus seized his fallen case, then — CRACK —
he Disapparated. Harry swore at the top of his voice, spinning on the
spot to see where Mundungus had gone. “COME BACK, YOU THIEVING — !”
“There’s no point, Harry.” Tonks had appeared out of nowhere, her mousy hair
wet with sleet. “Mundungus will probably be in London by now.
There’s no point yelling.” “He’s nicked Sirius’s stuff! Nicked it!” “Yes, but still,” said Tonks, who seemed perfectly
untroubled by this piece of information. “You should
get out of the cold.” She watched them go through the door of the Three
Broomsticks. The moment he was inside, Harry burst out, “He was
nicking Sirius’s stuff.” “I know, Harry, but please don’t shout, people are
staring,” whispered Hermione. “Go and sit down, I’ll
get you a drink.” Harry was still fuming when Hermione returned to
their table a few minutes later holding three bottles of
butterbeer. “Can’t the Order control Mundungus?” Harry
demanded of the other two in a furious whisper. “Can’t they at least stop him stealing everything that’s
not fixed down when he’s at headquarters?” “Shh!” said Hermione desperately, looking around to
make sure nobody was listening; there were a couple
of warlocks sitting close by who were staring at Harry
with great interest, and Zabini was lolling against a
pillar not far away. “Harry, I’d be annoyed too, I know
it’s your things he’s stealing — ”
Harry gagged on his butterbeer; he had momentarily
forgotten that he owned number twelve, Grimmauld
Place. “Yeah, it’s my stuff!” he said. “No wonder he wasn’t
pleased to see me! Well, I’m going to tell Dumbledore
what’s going on, he’s the only one who scares
Mundungus.” “Good idea,” whispered Hermione, clearly pleased that
Harry was calming down. “Ron, what are you staring
at?” “Nothing,” said Ron, hastily looking away from the
bar, but Harry knew he was trying to catch the eye of
the curvy and attractive barmaid, Madam Rosmerta,
for whom he had long nursed a soft spot. “I expect ‘nothing’s’ in the back getting more
firewhisky,” said Hermione waspishly. Ron ignored this jibe, sipping his drink in what he
evidently considered to be a dignified silence. Harry
was thinking about Sirius, and how he had hated
those silver goblets anyway. Hermione drummed her
fingers on the table, her eyes flickering between Ron
and the bar. The moment Harry drained the last
drops in his bottle she said, “Shall we call it a day
and go back to school, then?” The other two nodded; it had not been a fun trip and
the weather was getting worse the longer they stayed.
Once again they drew their cloaks tightly around
them, rearranged their scarves, pulled on their gloves,
then followed Katie Bell and a friend out of the pub
and back up the High Street. Harry’s thoughts
strayed to Ginny as they trudged up the road to
Hogwarts through the frozen slush. They had not met
up with her, undoubtedly, thought Harry, because
she and Dean were cozily closeted in Madam
Puddifoot’s Tea Shop, that haunt of happy couples.
Scowling, he bowed his head against the swirling sleet
and trudged on. It was a little while before Harry became aware that
the voices of Katie Bell and her friend, which were
being carried back to him on the wind, had become
shriller and louder. Harry squinted at their indistinct
figures. The two girls were having an argument about
something Katie was holding in her hand. “It’s
nothing to do with you, Leanne!” Harry heard Katie
say. They rounded a corner in the lane, sleet coming thick
and fast, blurring Harry’s glasses. Just as he raised a
gloved hand to wipe them, Leanne made to grab hold
of the package Katie was holding; Katie tugged it back
and the package fell to the ground. At once, Katie rose into the air, not as Ron had done,
suspended comically by the ankle, but gracefully, her
arms outstretched, as though she was about to fly. Yet there was something wrong, something eerie. ...
Her hair was whipped around her by the fierce wind,
but her eyes were closed and her face was quite
empty of expression. Harry, Ron, Hermione, and
Leanne had all halted in their tracks, watching. Then, six feet above the ground, Katie let out a
terrible scream. Her eyes flew open but whatever she
could see, or whatever she was feeling, was clearly
causing her terrible anguish. She screamed and
screamed; Leanne started to scream too and seized
Katie’s ankles, trying to tug her back to the ground.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione rushed forward to help,
but even as they grabbed Katie’s legs, she fell on top
of them; Harry and Ron managed to catch her but she
was writhing so much they could hardly hold her.
Instead they lowered her to the ground where she
thrashed and screamed, apparently unable to
recognize any of them. Harry looked around; the landscape seemed deserted. “Stay there!” he shouted at the others over the
howling wind. “I’m going for help!” He began to sprint toward the school; he had never
seen anyone behave as Katie had just behaved and
could not think what had caused it; he hurtled
around a bend in the lane and collided with what
seemed to be an enormous bear on its hind legs. “Hagrid!” he panted, disentangling himself from the
hedgerow into which he had fallen. “Harry!” said Hagrid, who had sleet trapped in his
eyebrows and beard, and was wearing his great,
shaggy beaverskin coat. “Jus’ bin visitin’ Grawp, he’s
cornin’ on so well yeh wouldn’ — ” “Hagrid, someone’s hurt back there, or cursed, or
something — ” “Wha?” said Hagrid, bending lower to hear what
Harry was saying over the raging wind. “Someone’s been cursed!” bellowed Harry. “Cursed? Who’s bin cursed — not Ron? Hermione?” “No, it’s not them, it’s Katie Bell — this way ...” Together they ran back along the lane. It took them
no time to find the little group of people around Katie,
who was still writhing and screaming on the ground;
Ron, Hermione, and Leanne were all trying to quiet
her. “Get back!” shouted Hagrid. “Lemme see her!” “Something’s happened to her!” sobbed Leanne. “I
don’t know what — ” Hagrid stared at Katie for a second, then without a
word, bent down, scooped her into his arms, and ran
off toward the castle with her. Within seconds, Katie’s
piercing screams had died away and the only sound
was the roar of the wind. Hermione hurried over to Katie’s wailing friend and
put an arm around her. “It’s Leanne, isn’t it?” The girl nodded. “Did it just happen all of a sudden, or — ?” “It was when that package tore,” sobbed Leanne,
pointing at the now sodden brown-paper package on
the ground, which had split open to reveal a greenish
glitter. Ron bent down, his hand outstretched, but
Harry seized his arm and pulled him back. “Don’t touch if!” He crouched down. An ornate opal necklace was
visible, poking out of the paper. “I’ve seen that before,” said Harry, staring at the
thing. “It was on display in Borgin and Burkes ages
ago. The label said it was cursed. Katie must have
touched it.” He looked up at Leanne, who had started
to shake uncontrollably. “How did Katie get hold of
this?” “Well, that’s why we were arguing. She came back
from the bathroom in the Three Broomsticks holding
it, said it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwarts
and she had to deliver it. She looked all funny when
she said it. ... Oh no, oh no, I bet she’d been
Imperiused and I didn’t realize!” Leanne shook with renewed sobs. Hermione patted
her shoulder gently. “She didn’t say who’d given it to her, Leanne?” “No ... she wouldn’t tell me ... and I said she was
being stupid and not to take it up to school, but she
just wouldn’t listen and ... and then I tried to grab it
from her . . . and — and — ” Leanne let out a wail of despair. “We’d better get up to school,” said Hermione, her
arm still around Leanne. “We’ll be able to find out
how she is. Come on. ...” Harry hesitated for a moment, then pulled his scarf
from around his face and, ignoring Ron’s gasp,
carefully covered the necklace in it and picked it up. “Well need to show this to Madam Pomfrey,” he said. As they followed Hermione and Leanne up the road,
Harry was thinking furiously. They had just entered
the grounds when he spoke, unable to keep his
thoughts to himself any longer. “Malfoy knows about this necklace. It was in a case at
Borgin and Burkes four years ago, I saw him having a
good look at it while I was hiding from him and his
dad. This is what he was buying that day when we
followed him! He remembered it and he went back for
it!” “I — I dunno, Harry,” said Ron hesitantly. “Loads of
people go to Borgin and Burkes ... and didn’t that girl
say Katie got it in the girls’ bathroom?” “She said she came back from the bathroom with it,
she didn’t necessarily get it in the bathroom itself — ” “McGonagall!” said Ron warningly. Harry looked up. Sure enough, Professor McGonagall
was hurrying down the stone steps through swirling
sleet to meet them. “Hagrid says you four saw what happened to Katie
Bell — upstairs to my office at once, please! What’s
that you’re holding, Potter?” “It’s the thing she touched,” said Harry. “Good lord,” said Professor McGonagall, looking
alarmed as she took the necklace from Harry. “No, no,
Filch, they’re with me!” she added hastily, as Filch
came shuffling eagerly across the entrance hall
holding his Secrecy Sensor aloft. “Take this necklace
to Professor Snape at once, but be sure not to touch
it, keep it wrapped in the scarf!” Harry and the others followed Professor McGonagall
upstairs and into her office. The sleet-spattered
windows were rattling in their frames, and the room
was chilly despite the fire crackling in the grate.
Professor McGonagall closed the door and swept
around her desk to face Harry, Ron, Hermione, and
the still sobbing Leanne.
“Well?” she said sharply. “What happened?” Haltingly, and with many pauses while she attempted
to control her crying, Leanne told Professor
McGonagall how Katie had gone to the bathroom in
the Three Broomsticks and returned holding the
unmarked package, how Katie had seemed a little
odd, and how they had argued about the advisability
of agreeing to deliver unknown objects, the argument
culminating in the tussle over the parcel, which tore
open. At this point, Leanne was so overcome, there
was no getting another word out of her. “All right,” said Professor McGonagall, not unkindly,
“go up to the hospital wing, please, Leanne, and get
Madam Pomfrey to give you something for shock.” When she had left the room, Professor McGonagall
turned back to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “What happened when Katie touched the necklace?” “She rose up in the air,” said Harry, before either Ron
or Hermione could speak, “and then began to scream,
and collapsed. Professor, can I see Professor
Dumbledore, please?” “The headmaster is away until Monday, Potter,” said
Professor McGonagall, looking surprised. “Away?” Harry repeated angrily. “Yes, Potter, away!” said Professor McGonagall tartly.
“But anything you have to say about this horrible
business can be said to me, I’m sure!” For a split second, Harry hesitated. Professor
McGonagall did not invite confidences; Dumbledore,
though in many ways more intimidating, still seemed
less likely to scorn a theory, however wild. This was a
life-and-death matter, though, and no moment to
worry about being laughed at. “I think Draco Malfoy gave Katie that necklace,
Professor.” On one side of him, Ron rubbed his nose in apparent
embarrassment; on the other, Hermione shuffled her
feet as though quite keen to put a bit of distance
between herself and Harry. “That is a very serious accusation, Potter,” said
Professor McGonagall, after a shocked pause. “Do you
have any proof?” “No,” said Harry, “but ...” and he told her about
following Malfoy to Borgin and Burkes and the
conversation they had overheard between him and
Mr. Borgin. When he had finished speaking, Professor
McGonagall looked slightly confused. “Malfoy took something to Borgin and Burkes for
repair?” “No, Professor, he just wanted Borgin to tell him how
to mend something, he didn’t have it with him. But
that’s not the point, the thing is that he bought
something at the same time, and I think it was that
necklace — ” “You saw Malfoy leaving the shop with a similar
package?” “No, Professor, he told Borgin to keep it in the shop
for him — ”
“But Harry,” Hermione interrupted, “Borgin asked
him if he wanted to take it with him, and Malfoy said no — “Because he didn’t want to touch it, obviously!” said
Harry angrily. “What he actually said was, ‘How would I look
carrying that down the street?’ ” said Hermione. “Well, he would look a bit of a prat carrying a
necklace,” interjected Ron. “Oh, Ron,” said Hermione despairingly, “it would be
all wrapped up, so he wouldn’t have to touch it, and
quite easy to hide inside a cloak, so nobody would see
it! I think whatever he reserved at Borgin and Burkes
was noisy or bulky, something he knew would draw
attention to him if he carried it down the street — and
in any case,” she pressed on loudly, before Harry
could interrupt, “I asked Borgin about the necklace,
don’t you remember? When I went in to try and find
out what Malfoy had asked him to keep, I saw it
there. And Borgin just told me the price, he didn’t say
it was already sold or anything — ” “Well, you were being really obvious, he realized what
you were up to within about five seconds, of course
he wasn’t going to tell you — anyway, Malfoy could’ve
sent off for it since — ” “That’s enough!” said Professor McGonagall, as
Hermione opened her mouth to retort, looking
furious. “Potter, I appreciate you telling me this, but
we cannot point the finger of blame at Mr. Malfoy
purely because he visited the shop where this
necklace might have been purchased. The same is
probably true of hundreds of people — ”
“ — that’s what I said — ” muttered Ron. “ — and in any case, we have put stringent security
measures in place this year. I do not believe that
necklace can possibly have entered this school
without our knowledge — ” “But — ” “ — and what is more,” said Professor McGonagall,
with an air of awful finality, “Mr. Malfoy was not in
Hogsmeade today.” Harry gaped at her, deflating. “How do you know, Professor?” “Because he was doing detention with me. He has
now failed to complete his Transfiguration homework
twice in a row. So, thank you for telling me your
suspicions, Potter,” she said as she marched past
them, “but I need to go up to the hospital wing now to
check on Katie Bell. Good day to you all.” She held open her office door. They had no choice but
to file past her without another word. Harry was angry with the other two for siding with
McGonagall; nevertheless, he felt compelled to join in
once they started discussing what had happened. “So who do you reckon Katie was supposed to give the
necklace to?” asked Ron, as they climbed the stairs to
the common room. “Goodness only knows,” said Hermione. “But whoever
it was has had a narrow escape. No one could have
opened that package without touching the necklace.”
“It could’ve been meant for loads of people,” said
Harry. “Dumbledore — the Death Eaters would love to
get rid of him, he must be one of their top targets. Or
Slughorn — Dumbledore reckons Voldemort really
wanted him and they can’t be pleased that he’s sided
with Dumbledore. Or — ” “Or you,” said Hermione, looking troubled. “Couldn’t have been,” said Harry, “or Katie would’ve
just turned around in the lane and given it to me,
wouldn’t she? I was behind her all the way out of the
Three Broomsticks. It would have made much more
sense to deliver the parcel outside Hogwarts, what
with Filch searching everyone who goes in and out. I
wonder why Malfoy told her to take it into the castle?” “Harry, Malfoy wasn’t in Hogsmeade!” said Hermione,
actually stamping her foot in frustration. “He must have used an accomplice, then,” said Harry.
“Crabbe or Goyle — or, come to think of it, another
Death Eater, he’ll have loads better cronies than
Crabbe and Goyle now he’s joined up — ” Ron and Hermione exchanged looks that plainly said
There’s no point arguing with him. “Dilligrout,” said Hermione firmly as they reached the
Fat Lady. The portrait swung open to admit them to the
common room. It was quite full and smelled of damp
clothing; many people seemed to have returned from
Hogsmeade early because of the bad weather. There
was no buzz of fear or speculation, however: Clearly,
the news of Katie’s fate had not yet spread.
“It wasn’t a very slick attack, really, when you stop
and think about it,” said Ron, casually turfing a first
year out of one of the good armchairs by the fire so
that he could sit down. “The curse didn’t even make it
into the castle. Not what you’d call foolproof.” “You’re right,” said Hermione, prodding Ron out of the
chair with her foot and offering it to the first year
again. “It wasn’t very well thought-out at all.” “But since when has Malfoy been one of the world’s
great thinkers?” asked Harry. Neither Ron nor Hermione answered him.  THE SECRET RIDDLE Katie was removed to St. Mungo’s Hospital for
Magical Maladies and Injuries the following day, by
which time the news that she had been cursed had
spread all over the school, though the details were
confused and nobody other than Harry, Ron,
Hermione, and Leanne seemed to know that Katie
herself had not been the intended target. “Oh, and Malfoy knows, of course,” said Harry to Ron
and Hermione, who continued their new policy of
feigning deafness whenever Harry mentioned his
Malfoy-Is-a-Death-Eater theory. Harry had wondered whether Dumbledore would
return from wherever he had been in time for Monday
night’s lesson, but having had no word to the
contrary, he presented himself outside Dumbledore ’s
office at eight o’clock, knocked, and was told to enter.
There sat Dumbledore looking unusually tired; his
hand was as black and burned as ever, but he smiled
when he gestured to Harry to sit down. The Pensieve  was sitting on the desk again, casting silvery specks
of light over the ceiling. “You have had a busy time while I have been away,”
Dumbledore said. “I believe you witnessed Katie’s
accident.” “Yes, sir. How is she?” “Still very unwell, although she was relatively lucky.
She appears to have brushed the necklace with the
smallest possible amount of skin: There was a tiny
hole in her glove. Had she put it on, had she even
held it in her ungloved hand, she would have died,
perhaps instantly. Luckily Professor Snape was able
to do enough to prevent a rapid spread of the curse — “Why him?” asked Harry quickly. “Why not Madam
Pomfrey?” “Impertinent,” said a soft voice from one of the
portraits on the wall, and Phineas Nigellus Black,
Sirius’s great-great-grandfather, raised his head from
his arms where he had appeared to be sleeping. “I
would not have permitted a student to question the
way Hogwarts operated in my day.” “Yes, thank you, Phineas,” said Dumbledore
quellingly. “Professor Snape knows much more about
the Dark Arts than Madam Pomfrey, Harry. Anyway,
the St. Mungo’s staff are sending me hourly reports,
and I am hopeful that Katie will make a full recovery
in time.” “Where were you this weekend, sir?”
