Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed
lo be drier and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were
thinner, and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange
and nameless trees of the denser wood. At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair
speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade they
seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after a time the trees
began to close in again, just where they had appeared from a distance to be
thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were discovered
unexpectedly, like the ruts of great giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken
roads long disused and choked with brambles. These lay usually right across
their line of march, and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they
climbed down they found the hollow filled with thick bushes and matted
undergrowth, which somehow would not yield to the left, but only gave way
when they turned to the right; and they had to go some distance along the
bottom before they could find a way up the further bank. Each time they
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and darker; and always to the left
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the
right and downwards. After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They
were being headed off, and were simply following a course chosen for them -
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled into a
fold that was wider and deeper than any they had yet met. It was so sleep
and overhung that it proved impossible to climb out of it again, either
forwards or backwards, without leaving their ponies and their baggage
behind. All they could do was to follow the fold - downwards. The ground
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully
over-arched by trees high above them. After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they came quite
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before
them. Coming to the opening they found that they had made their way down
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank
almost as steep. A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy
upon the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark
river of brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with
willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with thousands of faded
willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, fluttering yellow from the
branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.
'Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!' said Merry. 'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is
the River Withy windle! I will go on and explore.' He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses.
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground
between the cliff-foot and the river; in some places firm turf went down to
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he said, 'there seems to be something like
a footpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turn left and
follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest
eventually.' 'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That is, if the track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made the track,
do you suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting
very suspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe
all the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we should
have to go?' 'No,' said Merry, 'I haven't. I don't know in the least how far down
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to
make a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.' There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses were lush
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy
to follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, running down
gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at these
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across. The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies of all
kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning on their
backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great grey branches
reached across the path. Each step forward became more reluctant than the
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their legs,
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step without rest. Must have nap. It's cool
under the willows. Less flies!'
Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come on!' he cried. 'We can't
have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly. Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head swam.
There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing.
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes
and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it
looked, its sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many
long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures
that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the
bright sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the
grass. Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with their
backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped wide to
receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their
eyes, and then it seemed that they could almost hear words, cool words,
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a
compelling desire for cool water. 'Wait for me, Sam,' he stammered. 'Must
bathe feet a minute.' Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree,
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back
against the tree. Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He was
worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden
sleepiness uncanny. 'There's more behind this than sun and warm air,' he
muttered to himself. 'I don't like this great big tree. I don't trust it. Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become
of the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good way along the path;
and he had just caught them and brought them back towards the others, when
he heard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One was
the splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree threw me in! I
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 'You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.' 'What about the others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder what sort of dreams
they are having.' They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understood
the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The crack by which he had
laid himself had closed together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside,
but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped
like a pair of pincers. Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain. They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held
poor Merry. It was quite useless. 'What a foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo wildly. 'Why did we ever
come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!' He
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his own feet. A hardly
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 'I suppose we haven't got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked
Sam. 'I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That
wouldn't be much use.' 'Wait a minute!' cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by firewood. 'We might do something with fire!' 'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin
alive inside.'
'We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,' said Sam
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go, I'll have it down, if I have to gnaw
it.' He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-boxes
and a hatchet. Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made
a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped against the
trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had
struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of
flame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire licked
against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor
ran through the whole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you
don't. He says so!' 'Who? What?' shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the
tree. 'Put it out! Put it out!' begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading
outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they
had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river -valley and set up
ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of
why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying help! help!
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill
voice: it was blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate:
lost and witless. Suddenly he slopped. There was an answer, or so he thought; but it
seemed to come from behind him, away down the path further back in the
Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there could be no doubt:
someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and
happily, but it was singing nonsense: Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: Hey! Come merry dot ! derry dol! My darling! Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter, Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o, Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing? Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it
seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one,
slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red
as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his
hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white
water-lilies. 'Help!' cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out. 'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up one hand, and
they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. 'Now, my little
fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a bellows? What's the matter
here then? Do you know who I am? I'm Tom Bombadil. Tell me what's
your
trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly. 'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam. 'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. 'Old Man Willow?
Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I know the tune for
him. Old grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his marrow cold, if he don't behave
himself. I'll sing his roots off. I'll sing a wind up and blow leaf and
branch away. Old Man Willow!' Setting down his lilies carefully on the
grass, he ran to the tree. There he saw Merry's feet still sticking out -
the rest had already been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the
crack and began singing into it in a low voice. They could not catch the
words, but evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick. Tom sprang
away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with
it. 'You let them out again, Old Man Willow!' he said. 'What be you
a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water!
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized Merry's feet and drew him
out of the suddenly widening crack. There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap both cracks
closed fast again. A shudder ran through the tree from root to tip, and
complete silence fell. 'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other. Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. 'Well, my little fellows!' said he,
stooping so that he peered into their faces. 'You shall come home with me!
The table is all laden with yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread and
butter. Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for questions around the supper
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up
his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his hand went hopping and
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after him
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in
front of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter and further away.
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo! Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle. Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow. Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you! After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to
sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the slanting light of
evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the windows of Bucklebury
beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them;
trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over the path. White
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the
roots of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on
either side of them; and if they looked up to the pale sky, they caught
sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the
twilight, and leered down at them from the high bank and the edges of the
wood. They began to feel that all this country was unreal, and that they
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In the
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river flowed over
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left
behind. They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep of grass
welling up before them. The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars, which
were already shining in the sky. The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.
The path was now plain before them, well -tended and bordered with stone. It
wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale starry
night; and there, still high above them on a further slope, they saw the
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up
a long smooth hillside of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow
beam flowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom
Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep
shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of
the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half their
weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry dol!
rolled out the song to greet them. Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the
song of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: Now let the song begin! Let us sing together Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a golden
light was all about them.
Chapter 7 . In the House of Tom Bombadil The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and stood
still, blinking. They were in a long low room, filled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown was
green, green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was
of gold, shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of
forget-me-nots. About her feel in wide vessels of green and brown
earthenware, white water-lilies were floating, so that she seemed to be
enthroned in the midst of a pool. ’Enter, good guests!' she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was
her clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further
into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely surprised and
awkward, like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of
water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.
But before they could say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the
lily -bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river. ’Come dear folk!' she said, taking Frodo by the hand. Faugh and be
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.' Then lightly she passed them
and closing the door she turned her back to it, with her white arms spread
out across it. 'Let us shut out the night!' she said. 'For you are still
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things.
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.' The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and
smiled. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved
with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stood
enchanted by fair el ven- voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was
different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper and nearer to
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said
again. 'Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to
me. O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water ! O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!' Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed. 'Welcome!' she said. 'I had not heard that folk of the Shire were so
sweet -tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light in your eyes and
the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait
for the Master of the house! He will not be long. He is tending your tired
beasts.' The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry
busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught, among
many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words: Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow; Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. 'Fair lady!' said Frodo again after a while. 'Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?' 'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. Frodo looked at her questioningly. 'He is, as you have seen him,' she
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.' 'Then all this strange land belongs to him?' 'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a
burden,' she added in a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees and the
grasses and all things growing or living in the land belong each to
themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom
walking in the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.' A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his
thick brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He laughed, and going to
Goldberry, took her hand. 'Here's my pretty lady!' he said, bowing to the hobbits. 'Here's my
Goldberry clothed all in silver -green with flowers in her girdle! Is the
table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter;
milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for
us? Is the supper ready?' 'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?' Tom clapped his hands and cried: 'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and
you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and Tom will refresh
you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!' He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage and
round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping roof (a
penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house). Its walls
were of clean stone, but they were mostly covered with green hanging mats
and yellow curtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green
rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled with white blankets,
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench
laden with wide earthenware basins, and beside it stood brown ewers filled
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set
ready beside each bed. Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the
table, two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master. It was a long and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as only famished
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking -bowls seemed
to be clear cold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free
their voices. The guests became suddenly aware that they were singing
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking. At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The
guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each with a
footstool to his tired feet. There was a fire in the wide hearth before
them, and it was burning with a sweet smell, as if it were built of
apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in the room
were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end of the
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood before them, holding a candle;
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep. 'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the
wind off the hill-top. Good night!' She passed out of the room with a
glimmer and a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling
gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to
muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask at
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 'Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought
you at that moment?' Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said
he. 'Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just
chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was no plan of mine,
though I was waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that you
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water: all paths
lead that way, down to Withywindle. Old grey Willow-man, he's a mighty
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom nodded as if sleep was
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice: I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter,
to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted. Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: And that proved well for you — for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more
question: the one he most desired to have answered. 'Tell us, Master,' he
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.' 'No, don't!' said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright. 'Not now! Not until the morning!'
That is right!' said the old man. 'Now is the time for resting. Some
things are ill to hear when the world's in shadow. Sleep till the
morning -light, rest on the pillow ! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no grey
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a
candle in either hand he led them out of the room. Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets were
of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep beds and drawn
the light covers over them before they were asleep. In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he saw the
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall
of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle of
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood
the figure of a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the
dark plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many
wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he
wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed
and the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.
'Black Riders!' thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs
still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the
courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still
listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came over his
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had
waked, and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream:
tip-tap, squeak : the noise was like branches fretting in the wind,
twig-fingers scraping wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered if
there were willow-trees close to the house; and then suddenly he had a
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the
willow and listening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him
again. He sat up, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ’Fear
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went
to sleep again. It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet
sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading
irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless pool. It gurgled
under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he
thought. It will find its way in, and then I shall drown.' He felt that he
was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing up he set his fool on the
corner of a cold hard flagstone. Then he remembered where he was and lay
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors or
windows save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.' A
little breath of sweet air moved the curtain. He breathed deep and fell
asleep again. As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep
content, if logs are contented. They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom was moving
about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped
his hands, and cried: 'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew
back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered the
windows, at either end of the room, one looking east and the other looking
west. They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and found
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to
see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually
his view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a
pale morning: in the East, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool
stained red at the edges, lay glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves. Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of mist. The
Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down on to a sloping
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken
into many plumes and billows; the valley of the Withywindle. The stream ran
down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand
was a flower-garden and a clipped hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen. 'Good morning, merry friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy smell. 'Sun won't show her face
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet
sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but nought
wakes hobbit-folk in the early morning. In the night little folk wake up in the
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del,
my hearties! If you come soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!' Needless to say - not that Tom's threat sounded very serious - the
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard
about the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and
singing here and there outside. The room looked westward over the
mist-clouded valley, and the window was open. Water dripped down from the
thatched eaves above. Before they had finished breakfast the clouds had
joined into an unbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled. As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing
up above them. They could hear few words, but it seemed plain to them that
the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the
tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed
the kindly weather, because it delayed them from departing. The thought of
going had been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed
now that they would not go further that day. The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds rolled
up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could
be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and
go bubbling away down into the valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round
the corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain - and
indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him. This is Goldberry's washing day,' he said, ’and her autumn-cleaning. Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It’s a good day
for long tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom will start the
talking.’ He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if
speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a bright blue
eye under his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would
get out of his chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and
flowers, the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about
the evil things and good things, things friendly and things unfriendly,
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old
Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more
than enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of
trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with
a hatred of things that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking,
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest
without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten
woods; and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the
fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The
countless years had filled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with
malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was
rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, and a master of
winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods on both sides of the
river. His grey thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge
to the Downs.
Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up the young
stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and among
small flowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at last up on to
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the
stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills. Sheep were
bleating in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young Sun
shone like fire on the red metal of their new and greedy swords. There was
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and
mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass grew over
all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were
empty again. A shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were
stirred in the mounds. Barrow- wights walked in the hollow places with a
clink of rings on cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.' Stone rings
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight. The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the
Barrow- wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard. But it
was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to, even by a comfortable
fireside far away. These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of this
house had driven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. When they caught his words again they found that he had now wandered
into strange regions beyond their memory and beyond their waking thought,
into limes when the world was wider, and the seas flowed straight to the
western Shore; and still on and back Tom went singing out into ancient
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and
they saw that he nodded as if he was falling asleep. The hobbits sat still
before him, enchanted; and it seemed as if, under the spell of his words,
the wind had gone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had been
withdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was
filled with the light of white stars. Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passed
Frodo could not tell. Ele did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled
with wonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the
heavens seemed to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a
sudden fear of that silence: ’Who are you, Master?' he asked. ’Eh, what?' said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom. 'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only answer. Tell me, who are you,
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's
what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river and the
trees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn. He made paths
before the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow- wights. When the Elves passed
westward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark
under the stars when it was fearless - before the Dark Lord came from
Outside.' A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced hastily
through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood in the door
behind, framed in light. She held a candle, shielding its flame from the
draught with her hand; and the light flowed through it, like sunlight
through a white shell. 'The rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running downhill,
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!' 'And let us have food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are thirsty. And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!' With that he
jumped out of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from the
chimney-shelf and lit it in the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared. Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom and
Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half in
laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and odd the
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance,
neither hindering the other, in and out of the room, and round about the
table; and with great speed food and vessels and lights were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow. Tom bowed to his guests.
'Supper is ready,' said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was
clothed all in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes'
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and
he had green stockings. It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of
Tom's words may have missed one meal or many, but when the food was
before them it seemed at least a week since they had eaten. They did not sing or
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in
mirth and laughter. After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs that
began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and in the
silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than any they had
known, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars like
jewels in the depths. Then once more she wished them each good night and
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them
with questions. He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and
indeed to know much of all the history and doings of the Shire down from
days hardly remembered among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised
them; but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledge largely to
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more importance
than they had imagined. 'There's earth under his old feet, and clay on his
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo. Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 'Show me the precious Ring!' he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom. It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For a
second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his bright
blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then they gasped. There was no
sign of Tom disappearing! Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air - and it
vanished with a flash. Frodo gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed
it back to him with a smile. Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who has
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same and
weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He
was perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when
the talk was going again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers
and their queer ways - then he slipped the Ring on. Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked
an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all
right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and obviously could not
see him. He got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the
outer door. 'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in
his shining eyes. 'Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old Tom
Bombadil's not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside me!
We must talk a while more, and think about the morning. Tom must teach the
right road, and keep your feet from wandering.' Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came
and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful.
But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a
thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it would change
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. 'I am no weather-master,'
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.' By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his house,
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope in that way
to strike the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the Barrows. He told
them not to be afraid - but to mind their own business. 'Keep to the green grass. Don't you go a-meddling with old stone or
cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass
barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger
or difficulty the next day. Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them each on
the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back to their
bedroom.
Chapter 8 . Fog on the Barrow-Downs That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running in his
mind; a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver,
until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country opened before him
under a swift sunrise. The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like a
tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and
through the open window. Outside everything was green and pale gold. After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to say
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning: cool,
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh
from the North-west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, sniffing and
moving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved his hat and danced
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good
speed. They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, and
went slanting up towards the north end of the hill -brow under which it
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their ponies up the last steep
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. 'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have
never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!' He was so
distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear call came
rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair
was flying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A light
like the glint of water on dewy grass flashed from under her feet as she
danced. They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they looked
out from the hill-top over lands under the morning. It was now as clear and
far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll in
the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green,
yellow, russet under the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the
Brandywine. To the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a
distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop
in the lowlands and flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits.
Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in flats and
swellings of grey and green and pale earth -colours, until it faded into a
featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it
was no more than a guess of blue and a remote white glimmer blending with
the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of
the high and distant mountains. They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a few
stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road,
when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones of
the hills straight towards the Mountains. Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. ’Speed
now, fair guests!’ she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind
in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun
shines!' And to Frodo she said: 'Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry
meeting!' But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind the
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when
they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small
and slender like a sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked
she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill . Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet
of a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley, and then over the
shoulder of further hills, and down their long limbs, and up their smooth
sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no
tree nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short springy
turf, silent except for the whisper of the air over the edges of the land,
and high lonely cries of strange birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted,
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown
less. When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest
seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf
and root and mould. A shadow now lay round the edge of sight, a dark haze
above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened,
like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim. Inside there was no air
stirring, and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode across and looked
northwards. Then their hearts rose, for it seemed plain that they had come
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances had now all
become hazy and deceptive, but there could be no doubt that the Downs were
coming to an end. A long valley lay below them winding away northwards,
until it came to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there
seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark
line. That is a line of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they were planted in the old days.' 'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as we
have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and
be jogging on in search of a camping place.' But even as he spoke he turned
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and
looked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds,
and on some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of
green gums. That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight and
went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood a single
stone, standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour casting no
shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding
finger, or more like a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun was
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of
the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had had no power to warm it; but at
that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of
the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass. Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the
scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough to
explain what happened. However, that may be: they woke suddenly and
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over them.
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming through the mist just above
the west wall of the hollow in which they lay; north, south, and east,
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy
and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together with their heads
down. The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim. They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out
in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before their eyes into a white
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads
until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall of mist whose central
pillar was the standing stone. They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quite
lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had had of the line
of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone
that no thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as
quickly as their chilled fingers would work. Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and
down the long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As they
went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and
dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so cold
that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed
with grey drops. Then, mounting their ponies, they went slowly on again,
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end
of the long valley which they had seen in the morning. Once they were
through the gap, they had only lo keep on in anything like a straight line
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs
there might be no fog. Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and
wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley
seemed to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side
ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they
were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free. 'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over his shoulder, and he hurried
forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm. The dark
patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous
before him and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a
headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen
any sign of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the
morning. He had passed between them almost before he was aware: and even
as he did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted,
and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he called. 'Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why
don't you keep up?' There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones
shouting wildly: 'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into the mist
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry:
'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill. As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint
and far ahead and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of
the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help, help! often repeated,
ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries;
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be
climbing up and up. Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he
at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary, sweating and yet
chilled. It was wholly dark.
'Where are you?' he cried out miserably. There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing past him
now in shreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less
near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were
appearing overhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind
began to hiss over the grass. He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and he made towards
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and
the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him that he was now facing
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from the
north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To his right there
loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood
there. ’Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid. 'Here!' said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of the
ground. 'I am waiting for you!' 'No!' said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he
looked up, in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a
pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and
he remembered no more. When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall nothing
except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned,
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he
was probably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow- wights about
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself:
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the
Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage
hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid
hobbit, wailing for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo
was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no
longer felt limp like a helpless prey. As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all
at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was
growing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he was
in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor
beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there
in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale; and they were clad in
white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light
they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword. Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The voice
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin,
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad
but horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves:
grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing
against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it
had changed into an incantation: Cold be hand and heart and bone, and cold be sleep under stone: never mare to wake on stony bed, never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land. He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself
on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind
of passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the
incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do. But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: he
could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping in his pocket,
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer.
Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay
beside him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions.
With what strength he had he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and
the hand broke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the
hilt. There was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a
snarling noise. Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once
back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of
the fog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom
singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that name his voice
seemed to grow strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber
echoed as if to drum and trumpet. Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his heart
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was
coming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voice
singing: Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow, Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling, and
suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low
door -like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond Frodo's feet;
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of
the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the
faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the
sickly hue had left them. They looked now as if they were only very deeply
asleep. Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing: Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty! Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended. At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber
fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek, fading away
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence. ’Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean grass! You
must help me bear them.' Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the
barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again,
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he
was bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold, silver,
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He
climbed the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine. There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair, and
looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their backs upon
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a
clear and commanding voice: Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling! Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen; Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.
Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open! To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed
their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about in amazement,
first at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow-top
above them; and then at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets. 'What in the name of wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet
that had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he said. 'The men of
Carn Dym came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the spear in my
heart!' He clutched at his breast. 'No! No!' he said, opening his eyes. 'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?' 'I thought that I was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!' 'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung
his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as
if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand. 'You won't find your clothes again,' said Tom, bounding down from the
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the sunlight. One would have
thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the
horror faded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the merry
glint in his eyes. 'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half
amused. 'Why not?' But Tom shook his head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be
glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now heart and limb!
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!' He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him
Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between
their hill and the next, still whistling and crying: Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until he
was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now!
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south. The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for a while
on the grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the sun with the
delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a
friendly clime, or of people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake
one day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of
promise. By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He
reappeared, hat first, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an
obedient line six ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly
old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) than their
own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them
any such names, but they answered to the new names that Tom had given
them for the rest of their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits. 'Here are your ponies, now!' he said. 'They've more sense (in some
ways) than you wandering hobbits have - more sense in their noses. For they
sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if they run to save
themselves, then they run the right way. You must forgive them all; for
though their hearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow- wights is not what
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!' Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments from
their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged to put on
some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought against the
oncoming of winter. 'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?'
asked Frodo. 'He's mine,' said Tom. 'My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride
him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When your ponies
stayed with me, they got to know my Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the
night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he'd look for them and with
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road;
so he needs a pony. For you cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding,
when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.' The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many times;
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he
would not feel happy till he had seen them safe over the borders of his
land. Tve got things to do,' he said: 'my making and my singing, my
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can't be always
near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and
Goldberry is waiting.' It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and ten,
and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had been lunch
beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted now off the
remainder of Tom's provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that
Tom had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering hobbits and
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he
made into a pile that glistened and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie
there 'free to all finders, birds, beasts. Elves or Men, and all kindly
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight ever come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch
set with blue stones, many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his
head, and saying at last: 'Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who long
ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not
forget her!' For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen,
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold.
They gleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strange
metal, light and strong, and set with many fiery stones. Whether by some
virtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound, the
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. 'Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,' he said. 'Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south, or
far away into dark and danger.' Then he told them that these blades were
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the
Dark
Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dym in the Land of
Angmar. 'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured, 'yet still some go wandering,
sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things
folk that are heedless.' The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they had a
vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like a vast
shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and grim with
bright swords, and last came one with a star on his brow. Then the vision
faded, and they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. They made ready, packing their bags and lading their ponies. Their new
weapons they hung on their leather belts under their jackets, feeling them
very awkward, and wondering if they would be of any use. Fighting had not
before occurred to any of them as one of the adventures in which their
flight would land them. At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and then
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the
top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight on the gold went
up like a yellow flame. Then they turned a shoulder of the Downs and it was
hidden from view. Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great
stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to the northern gap
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry
journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom
sang most of the time, but it was chiefly nonsense, or else perhaps a strange
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were
mainly those of wonder and delight. They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further
away than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep at mid-day
would have prevented them from reaching it until after nightfall on the day
before. The dark line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of
bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further
side. Tom said that it had once been the boundary of a kingdom, but a very
long lime ago. He seemed to remember something sad about it, and would not
say much. They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the wall,
and then Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing somewhat to the
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace,
but the sun was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall
trees ahead, and they knew that they had come back to the Road after many
unexpected adventures. They galloped their ponies over the last furlongs,
and halted under the long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a
sloping bank, and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away
below them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to North-east, and on
their right it fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of
water. They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There was nothing
to be seen. 'Well, here we are again at last!' said Frodo. 'I suppose we
haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest! But
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.' The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black Riders
came suddenly over them again. Ever since they had entered the Forest they
had thought chiefly of getting back to the Road; only now when it lay
beneath their feet did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was
more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself. They
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun, but the Road was brown and
empty. 'Do you think,' asked Pippin hesitatingly, 'do you think we may be
pursued, tonight?' 'No, I hope not tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next
day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain. Out east my
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond
his country.' All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that
he would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone did. They would
soon now be going forward into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but
the most vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering
twilight they longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense of loss was on
them. They stood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only
slowly became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. ’Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that your
own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'll
come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors looking westward.
There you'll find an old inn that is called The Prancing Pony. Barliman
Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards
the morning will speed you upon your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your
merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!' They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once more
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's back, and rode
up over the bank and away singing into the dusk. The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight. 'I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,' said Sam. 'He's a
caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see
naught better, nor queerer. But I won't deny I'll be glad to see this
Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it'll be like The Green Dragon away back
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?' 'There are hobbits in Bree,' said Merry, 'as well as Big Folk. I
daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts. My people ride out there now and again.' 'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire
all the same. Don't make yourselves too much at home ! Please remember -all
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill,
if any name must be given.' They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the evening.
Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again,
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead. Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against misty
stars; and under its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they
now hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a door between them and the
night.
Chapter 9 . At the Sign of The Prancing Pony Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself, there
was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep valley a little
further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round
Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland
only a few miles broad. The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short, cheerful
and independent: they belonged to nobody but themselves; but they were more
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of
the world about them than was (or is) usual with Big People. According to
their own tales they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants
of the first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few
had survived the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned
again over the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the
grass. In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing
of their origin. They were taller and darker than the Men of Bree and were
believed to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards
even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.
When they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends
of them. There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land and they
claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that was
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized.
They lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself,
especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men.
The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another) were on
friendly terms, minding their own affairs in their own ways, but both
rightly regarding themselves as necessary parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and the
affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasionally the
Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though
their link land was not much further than a day's riding east of the
Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An
occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would come out to the Inn for a
night or two, but even that was becoming less and less usual. The
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond
the borders, as Outsiders, and took very little interest in them,
considering them dull and uncouth. There were probably many more
Outsiders scattered about in the West of the World in those days than the people of
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to
dig a hole in any bank and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between
the Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts. The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big Folk,
mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows looking west.
On that side, running in more than half a circle from the hill and back to
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road
ran out of the village. The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers. Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;
another ancient road crossed the East Road just outside (he dike at the
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying
in the Eastfarthing, descending from those days, when news from North,
South, and East could be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used
to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,
and the North Road was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway. The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was an
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and
inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of the four villages;
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains. It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the village.
They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but at the door of the lodge
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and
looked over the gate at them in surprise. ’What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. 'We are making for the inn here,' answered Frodo. 'We are journeying
east and cannot go further tonight.' 'Hobbits ! Four hobbits ! And what's more, out of the Shire by their
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared at
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and let them ride
through. 'We don't often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,' he went
on, as they halted a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon my wondering what
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?' 'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good
place to discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the
tone of his voice. 'Your business is your own, no doubt,' said the man; 'but it's my
business to ask questions after nightfall.' 'We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to
stay at the inn here,' put in Merry. 'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough
for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had
heard.' 'All right, all right!' said the man. 'I meant no offence. But you'll
find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking you
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony, you'll find
you're oat the only guests.' He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see
in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was
glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they rode forward. He
wondered why the man was so suspicious, and whether any one had been
asking for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? He might have
arrived, while they were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy. The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to
his house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached houses,
and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and strange to them.
Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and many windows, and felt
his heart sink. He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees,
and other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring
day. He pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. 'We surely aren't going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?' he
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk in these pans, why don't we look for
some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.' 'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil recommended it.
I expect it's homelike enough inside.' Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut
out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor
windows were level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was a
large doorway reached by a few broad steps. The door was open and light
streamed out of it. Above the arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a
large signboard: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN
BUTTERBUR. Many of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a merry
song inside, and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the chorus. They
listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and then got off their
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in the
yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a
short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and
was bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden
with full mugs. ’Can we—' began Frodo. 'Half a minute, if you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out
again, wiping his hands on his apron. 'Good evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be
wanting?' 'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed. Are you Mr. Butterbur?' 'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!
You're from the Shire, eh?' he said, and then suddenly he clapped his hand
to his forehead, as if trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. 'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' 'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill.' 'There now!' said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. 'It's gone
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to think. I'm run off my feet;
but I'll see what I can do for you. We don't often get a party out of the
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is
such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn't been for long
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree. 'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where are you, you woolly -footed slow-coach?
Nob!' 'Coming, sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a door,
and seeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with great
interest. 'Where's Bob?' asked the landlord. 'You don't know? Well find him!
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted
off with a grin and a wink. 'Well, now, what was I going to say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight,
my head is going round. There's a party that came up the Greenway from
down South last night - and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there's a
travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now
there's you. If you weren't hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But
we've got a room or two in the north wing that were made special for
hobbits, when this place was built. On the ground floor as they usually
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable.
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard work for two legs,
but I don't get thinner. I'll look in again later. If you want anything,
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!' Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed
capable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They found
themselves in a small and cosy room. There was a bit of bright fire burning
on the hearth, and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs.
There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a
large hand-bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant, came bustling in long before
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates. 'Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?' They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr.
Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid. There
was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter,
and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show,
and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much
relieved by the excellence of the beer). The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them. 'I don't know whether you would care to join the company, when you have
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you, if you had a
mind. We don't get Outsiders - travellers from the Shire, I should say,
begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story
or song you may have in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack
anything!' So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don't
forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!' 'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself! Don't get lost, and don't
forget that it is safer indoors!' The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering was
large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light. This came chiefly from a blazing log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from
the beams were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was
standing near the fire, talking to a couple of dwarves and one or two
strange-looking men. On the benches were various folk: men of Bree, a
collection of local hobbits (sitting chattering together), a few more
dwarves, and other vague figures difficult to make out away in the shadows
and comers. As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of welcome
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had come up the
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to
the Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names, they were
seldom sure who the names belonged to. The Men of Bree seemed all to have
rather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight,
Goatleaf, Heathertoes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention
Butterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The Mug worts, for
instance, seemed numerous. But most of them had natural names, such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which
were used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they
could not imagine sharing a name without being related, they took Frodo to
their hearts as a long-lost cousin. The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo
soon found that some explanation of what he was doing would have to be
given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which
there was much wagging of heads, although neither of these words were much
used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (at
which there was silent astonishment), and that he and his friends wanted to
collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in
the eastern lands. At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to
write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for
several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he could
go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about
doings in the Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around. The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and telling
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There was trouble away
in the South, and it seemed that the Men who had come up the Greenway
were on the move, looking for lands where they could find some peace. The
Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very ready to take a large
number of strangers into their little land. One of the travellers, a
squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling that more and more people
would be coming north in the near future. 'If room isn't found for them,
they'll find it for themselves. They've a right to live, same as other
folk,' he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the
prospect. The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings
in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now
feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the
roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the
fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out
like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made
Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in
the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who
they were related to.
Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten man,
sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the
hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was smoking a
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were stretched out before him,
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel -stained cloak of heavy dark-
green cloth was drawn close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he
wore a hood that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be
seen as he watched the hobbits. ’Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr.
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?' 'Him?' said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye
without turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he
pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven't
seen him about lately. What his right name is I've never heard: but he's
known round here as Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks;
though he don't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there's no
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him.' But at
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand for more ale and his
last remark remained unexplained. Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or
guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be
threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes. 'I am called Strider,' he said in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' 'He did,' said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under the
stare of those keen eyes. 'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider, 'if I were you, I should stop
your young friends from talking too much. Drink, fire, and chance -meeting
are pleasant enough, but, well - this isn't the Shire. There are queer folk
about. Though I say it as shouldn't, you may think,' he added with a wry
smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And there have been even stranger travellers
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further
sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance. Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local
hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond
the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and
had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring
the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries
in Bree after that name. Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful of
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous. 'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and
laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as
was good for him. Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habit
when making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on
and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if me
suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something a the room.
He resisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At
any rate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke 'a few suitable words', as
they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will
help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and
then he hesitated and coughed. Everyone in the room was now looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one of
the hobbits. 'A song! A song!' shouted all the others. 'Come on now, master,
sing us something that we haven’t heard before!' For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered. There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill, And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill. The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a five-stringed fiddle; And up and down he runs his bow, Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle. The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes; When there's good cheer among the guests, He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes. They also keep a horned cow
as proud as any queen; But music turns her head like ale, And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green. And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons! For Sunday* there's a special pair, And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons. The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail; A dish and a spoon on the table danced, The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail. The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair; And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air. Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 'The white horses of the Moon, They neigh and champ their silver bits; But their master's been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun'll be rising soon!' So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead: He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
'It's after three!' he said. They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon, While his horses galloped up in rear, And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon. Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar, The cow and the horses stood on their heads; The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the floor. With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun, And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon. The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head. She * hardly believed her fiery eyes; For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed! There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and the song
tickled their fancy. 'Where's old Barley?' they cried. 'He ought to hear
this. Bob ought to learn his cat the fiddle, and then we'd have a dance.' They called for more ale, and began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master!
Come on now! Once more!' They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again,
while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known, and they were
quick at picking up words. It was now Frodo's turn to feel pleased with
himself. He capered about on the table; and when he came a second time to
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for
he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off
the table with a crash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer
disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole ! The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their feet
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam,
who found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from
a distance. It was plain that many people regarded them now as the
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But
there was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had
been whispering together a good deal during the evening. Harry the
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away under
the tables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he
had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had
slipped on when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out. 'Well?' said Strider, when he reappeared. ’Why did you do that? Worse
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or
should I say your finger?' 'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. 'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but we had better wait until the
uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a
quiet word with you.' 'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name. 'A matter of some importance - to us both,' answered Strider, looking
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 'Very well,' said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk to
you later.' Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had
come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to several conflicting
accounts of the event at the same time. 'I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,' said a hobbit; 'or leastways I didn't see
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner of
speaking.' 'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. 'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.' 'There's some mistake somewhere,' said Butterbur, shaking his head.
There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.' 'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices. 'How should I know? He's welcome to go where he will, so long as he
pays in the morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.' 'Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn't,' said Mugwort
obstinately. 'And I say there's some mistake,' repeated Butterbur, picking up the
tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' He came forward into the firelight; but most of the company backed
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly under the tables after
he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very probably,
that his house would be full again on many future nights, until the present
mystery had been thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have you been doing, Mr.
Underhill?' he asked. 'Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks
with your acrobatics!' 'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' 'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling,
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand - and warn
me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way -uncanny,
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise
you. And now I think I'll be getting to bed. We shall be making an early
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?' 'Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' 'Certainly!' said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how many
private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would
reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He began to suspect
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs.
Chapter 10. Strider Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door! 'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' 'I am called Strider,' he answered: 'and though he may have forgotten
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.' 'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,' said
Frodo. 'What have you to say?' 'Several things,' answered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' 'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply. 'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, and
give you some good advice - but I shall want a reward.' 'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he
could not spare any of it. 'No more than you can afford,' answered Strider with a slow smile, as
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you.' 'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if
I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' 'Excellent!' exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you
what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when
you have heard me.' 'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?' 'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your
business — ' He got up and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked
out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again. 'I have quick ears,' he
went on, lowering his voice, 'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted
many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish.
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four
hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to
old Bombadil or to one another, but one thing interested me. Please
remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that
I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr.
Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, I
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodo
angrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should
advise him to explain it.' 'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted to find him
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret
that concerned me and my friends. 'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of the secret than you do. And care is needed!' He leaned forward and looked at them. 'Watch every
shadow!' he said in a low voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree.
On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared
later, coming up the Greenway from the south.' There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to
have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And the
landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the
company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed quiet in here.' 'It would have been better,' said Strider. 'I would have stopped your
going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me
in to see you, or take a message.' 'Do you think he ' began Frodo. 'No, I don't think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. 'But I hope we shall get to
know one another better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened
at the end of your song. For that little prank ' 'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo. 'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That accident has made your
position dangerous.' 'Hardly more than it was already,' said Frodo. 'I knew these horsemen
were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to
have gone away.' 'You must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. And more are coming. There are others. I know their number. I know these
Riders.' He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard. 'And there are some
folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,' he went on. 'Bill Ferny, for
instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call at his
house. You must have noticed him among the company: a swarthy sneering
fellow. He was very close with one of the Southern strangers, and they
slipped out together just after your "accident". Not all of those
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody;
or make mischief for amusement.' 'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?'
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints. 'News of you, of course,' answered Strider. 'An account of your
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that they
would hardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely
that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can
do as you like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may say
that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I
have wandered over them for many years. I am older than I look. I might
prove useful. You will have to leave the open road after tonight; for the
horsemen will watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be
allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won't go far. They will
come on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do you
wish them to find you? They are terrible!' The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face was
drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his chair. The
room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening
to sounds in the Night far away.
'There!' he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow.
'Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but
you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you
can. Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have
him?' There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he
broke out: 'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows
something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he
puts it.' Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do you know it?' 'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get
to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You must
make up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help
you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me
already? Still here it is ' At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur had
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider
withdrew into a dark corner. 'I've come to bid you good night,' said the landlord, putting the
candles on the table. 'Nob! Take the water to the rooms!' He came in and
shut the door. 'It's like this,' he began, hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll
admit; and I'm a busy man. But first one thing and then another this week
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see,
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of
Baggins in particular.' 'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo. 'Ah! you know best,' said the landlord, knowingly. 'I won't give you
away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the name of
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you well enough, if I may
say so.' 'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting. 'A stout little fellow with red cheeks, ' said Mr. Butterbur solemnly. Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't help you much; it
goes for most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with
a glance at Pippin. 'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most,
and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your
pardon, but he said it, not me.' 'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly. 'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is,
but he's a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I don't know what
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into
a block of wood, I shouldn't wonder. He's a bit hasty. Still what's done
can't be undone. ' 'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts. 'Where was I?' said the landlord, pausing and snapping his fingers. 'Ah, yes ! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my room
without a knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in the morning. Will you do
something for me? You've only to name it, I said. I'm in a hurry, said he,
and I've no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow,
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and then he gave me a
letter. 'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr. Butterbur, producing a letter
from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly (he valued
his reputation as a lettered man): Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. 'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo.
'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That's what you came to tell me, I
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.' Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. 'You're right, master,' he said, 'and I beg your pardon. And I'm mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if
harm comes of it. But I didn't keep it back a-purpose. I put it by safe. Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day
after, and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a busy man. I'll do what I can to set
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it. 'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says
to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this way
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But you need ask no questions. And if I'm not with him, he may be in
trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I'll be
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' 'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 'These black men,' said the landlord lowering his voice. 'They're
looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I'm a hobbit. It was on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men were at the door
asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid
the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been
asking the same question all the way to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger,
Strider, he's been asking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you,
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.' 'Fie did!' said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. 'And
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.' The landlord jumped with surprise. 'You!' he cried. 'You're always
popping up. What do you want now?' 'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.' 'Well, you know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking
suspiciously at Strider. 'But if I was in your plight, I wouldn't take up
with a Ranger.' 'Then who would you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who
only remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? They
cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?' 'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur,
looking really scared. 'But why can't you stay here quiet for a bit, Mr.
Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What are these black men
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' 'I'm sorry I can't explain it all,' answered Frodo. 'I am tired and
very worried, and it's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to
warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from ' 'They come from Mordor,' said Strider in a low voice. 'From Mordor,
Barliman, if that means anything to you.' 'Save us!' cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently was
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It
is,' said Frodo. 'Are you still willing to help me?' 'I am,' said Mr. Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me can do
against, against ' he faltered. 'Against the Shadow in the East,' said Strider quietly. 'Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he
is far away.' 'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself
this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo's going off has
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he
is.' 'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo. 'I hope not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks or no spooks, they
won't get in The Pony so easy. Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can stand on my legs. Me
and my folk'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you
can.' 'In any case we must be called at dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' 'Right! I'll see to the orders,' said the landlord. 'Good night, Mr.
Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night - now, bless me! Where's your
Mr. Brandybuck?' 'I don’t know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all
about Merry, and it was getting late. 'I am afraid he is out. He said
something about going for a breath of air.' 'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see
your friend is let in when he comes. I'd better send Nob to look for him.
Good night to you all!' At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another
doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated
down the passage. 'Well?' said Strider. 'When are you going to open that letter?' Frodo
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be
Gandalf s. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was
the following message: THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418. Dear Frodo, Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find
that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree.
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business
and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I
do not come, Elrond will advise you. Yours in haste GANDALF. PS. Do NOT use It again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by
night! PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. All that is gold does not glitter, Not all those who wander are lost; The old that is strong does not wither, Deep roots are not reached by the frost. From the ashes a fire shall be woken, A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king. PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his
memory is like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he forgets, I
shall roast him. Fare Well 7 Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!' he said. 'He deserves
roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in
Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger.' 'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf s
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf s friend at
once?' he asked. 'It would have saved time.' 'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?' said Strider. 'I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade you to
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend
to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study you first, and make
sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As soon as I had
made up my mind, I was ready to tell you whatever you asked. But I must
admit,' he added with a queer laugh, 'that I hoped you would take to me for
my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' 'They are - at first sight at any rate,' laughed Pippin with sudden
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as
we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after
lying for days in hedges and ditches.' 'It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would die
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.' Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?'
he demanded. 'You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with
you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have
you to say to that?' 'That you are a stout fellow,' answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!' He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the
hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by his side. They did not dare to
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and
if by life or death I can save you, I will.' There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. 'I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came,' he said, 'or at
least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.' 'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost ' 'Did the verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out
what they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf s
letter, if you have never seen it?' 'I did not know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and those verses go
with that name.' He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was
indeed broken a foot below the hilt. 'Not much use is it, Sam?' said
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.' Sam said nothing. 'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled. Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we
are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it
unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.' 'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?' 'It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here
to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have a
chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us.
After Weathertop our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have
to choose between various dangers.' ’When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?' Strider looked grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came west with him
in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the
last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We
last met on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for
Rivendell in the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. 'I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. We should
have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many
days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of
Gildor that told me this; and later they told me that you had left your
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching
the East Road anxiously.' 'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo. 'I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except
the Enemy himself,' said Strider. 'But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is
greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.' Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of
all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in
the dark to look for him.' At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the
passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He shut the door
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in
alarm for a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen
them! Black Riders!' 'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?' 'Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you did
not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again and was
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son
of deeper shade among the shadows across the road, just beyond the edge of
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was
no horse.' 'Which way did it go?' asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the stranger for the first time. 'Go on!' said Frodo. 'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,' continued Merry. 'I
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; 'but it was foolish.' 'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could
hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went, and
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the other was
whispering, or hissing. I couldn't hear a word that was said. I did not
creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt
terrified, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, when
something came behind me and I... I fell over.' 'I found him, sir,' put in Nob. 'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with a
lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just
nigh Bill Ferny's house I thought I could see something in the Road. I
couldn't swear to it, but it looked to me as if two men was stooping over
something, lilting it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there
was no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had fallen into deep water," he says to
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he
got up and ran back here like a hare.' 'I am afraid that's true,' said Merry, 'though I don't know what I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't
know what came over me.' 'I do,' said Strider. 'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They
will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before
we leave Bree.' 'What will happen?' said Merry. 'Will they attack the inn?' 'No, I
think not,' said Strider. 'They are not all here yet. And in any case that
is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not
openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they
are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before
us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of
the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when
they left him.' 'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do?' 'Stay here, and do not go to your rooms ! They are sure to have found
out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking north and close
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door.
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.' While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned. 'Well Masters,' said Nob, 'I've ruffled up the clothes and put in a
bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your
head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag - Underhill, sir,' he added with a
grin. Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!' he said. 'But what will happen when
they have penetrated the disguise?' 'We shall see,' said Strider. 'Fet us hope to hold the fort till
morning.' 'Good night to you,' said Nob, and went off to take his part in the
watch on the doors. Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew the
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles. The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They
talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. 'Jumped over the Moon!' chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in his
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.' 'I hope so,' said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.
Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river -bank. The house at
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air. As he stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees; the
gate seemed to open of its own accord and close again without a sound.
Terror seized him. He shrank back, and for a moment he stood trembling in
the hall. Then he shut and locked the door. The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led with
stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three black
figures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground. One went
to the door, one to the corner of the house on either side; and there they
stood, as still as the shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away. The
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had been
unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. 'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing. At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent the
night like fire on a hill -top. AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE! Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep
from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did,
out of the back door, through the garden, and over the fields. When he
reached the nearest house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the
doorstep. 'No, no, no!' he was crying. 'No, not me! I haven't got it!' It
was some time before anyone could make out what he was babbling about.
At last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange invasion
from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time. FEAR! FIRE! FOES! The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that had not
been sounded for a hundred years, not since the white wolves came in the
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. AWAKE! AWAKE! Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black
figures fled from the house. One of them let fall a hobbit-cloak on the
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs broke out, and gathering to
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there
was the sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!
Sauron would deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they
knew now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down
the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if some
sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with
the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling
round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. He opened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard.
Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang. The first grey light of day was in the room, and a cold air was coming
through the open window. As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice:
the windows had been forced open and were swinging, and the curtains were
flapping; the beds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. Butterbur
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he
said), but he had never heard a sound. 'Never has such a thing happened in my time!' he cried, raising his
hands in horror. ’Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters
ruined and all! What are we coming to?' 'Dark times,' said Strider. 'But for the present you may be left in
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about
breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed
in a few minutes.' Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready, and
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had
vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell
on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well set out for the
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was
weighing up their strength and courage. 'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,' he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. 'We should not go
much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count
on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take
with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or
forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you
prepared to carry on your backs?' 'As much as we must,' said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying to
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt). 'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly. 'Can't anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a
couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage? I don't
suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,' he added,
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it. 'I doubt it,' said the landlord unhappily. 'The two or three
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they're
gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there
are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.' 'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you had better do that. I am afraid
we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of
starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'
'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a crumb, I
hope: we can have breakfast while we wait - and sit down to it. Let's get
hold of Nob!' In the end there was more than three hours' delay. Bob came back with
the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. 'A poor old half-starved creature it is,' said Bob; 'but he won't part with
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you're placed, not if I knows
Bill Ferny.' 'Bill Ferny?' said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?' 'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home
to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought of kind
Master Ferny's: just a way of increasing his profits from the affair. The
chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death's door. But there
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?' Bill Ferny's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at
least three times the pony's value in those pans. It proved to be a bony,
underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence
as some compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, and
well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silver pennies was a
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. Asa matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned
out later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The others had been
driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different
corners of the Bree-land. Merry's ponies had escaped altogether, and
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a
while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom's
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very
fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well; so
on the whole they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But
they never came to Rivendell. However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone
for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there was a great
commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of the
raid on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had
also disappeared in the night, none other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once. 'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,' said
Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and not
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had
joined their party. After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of
the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that
Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as
would last for many uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and
Staddle, and many even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road
to see the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or
hanging out of the windows. Strider had changed his mind, and he decided to leave Bree by the main
road. Any attempt to set off across country at once would only make matters
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to,
and to prevent them from trespassing. They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with
many thanks. 'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry
once more,' said Frodo. 'I should like nothing better than to stay in your
house in peace for a while.' They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its
fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe
for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.' The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped out of
doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they drew
near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick
hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the windows he caught a
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. 'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more
than half like a goblin.' Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy black
brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a sneer. He was
smoking a short black pipe. As they approached he took it out of his mouth
and spat. 'Morning, Longshanks!' he said. 'Off early? Found some friends at
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer. 'Morning, my little friends!' he
said to the others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's
Stick -at-naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so
pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!' He spat again. Sam turned quickly. 'And you. Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out
of sight, or it will get hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and
curses came from behind the hedge. 'Waste of a good apple,' said Sam
regretfully, and strode on. At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and
stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some miles. It
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet
of Bree-hill, and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit -holes of
Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a deep
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed
where Combe lay; Archet was hidden in the trees beyond. After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the
North. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider. 'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said Pippin. 'Our last short cut through
woods nearly ended in disaster.' 'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,
short or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on
the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to
Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great
loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater
Marshes. But, of course, they would have to pass through the marshes
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging. However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it
had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they would have
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and
full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided them
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they
would soon have been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit. 'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,' he
said; 'though I don't think he will follow us himself. He knows the land
round here well enough, but he knows he is not a match for me in a wood. It
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far
away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.' Whether because of Strider's skill or for some other reason, they saw
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day: neither
two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and a few
squirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course eastwards; and
still all was quiet and peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came
out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they
turned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat expanse of
country, much more difficult to manage. They were far beyond the borders of
the Bree-land, out in the pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the
Midge- water Marshes. The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they
came upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes filled with the
warbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their way carefully to
keep both dry-footed and on their proper course. At first they made
fan-progress, but as they went on, their passage became slower and more
dangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous, and there was no
permanent trail even for Rangers to find through their shifting quagmires. The flies began to torment them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair. 'I am being eaten alive!' cried Pippin. 'Midgewater! There are more
midges than water!' 'What do they live on when they can't get hobbit?' asked Sam,
scratching his neck. They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their
camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the biting insects
would not let them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the
reeds and tussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of the
cricket. There were thousands of them, and they squeaked all round,
neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the hobbits were
nearly frantic. The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost as
comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been left
behind, the midges still pursued them. As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that
far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded many
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off. 'What is the light?' he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night. 'I do not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make out. It
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.' Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the last
straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land before
them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could
now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line
and a little separated from the others. It had a conical top, slightly
flattened at the summit. 'That is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road, which we have left
far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far from its
foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I
suppose we had better do so.' ’What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It
is close to the Road.' 'But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?' 'Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not
pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And anyway,
unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find
us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in
this country that could see us, as we stand here, from that hill-top. Not
all the birds are to be trusted, and there are other spies more evil than
they are.' The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright
unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!'
he said. 'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo. 'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, 'I
think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I
know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.' All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early evening came
down. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and vapours lay
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy birds were piping and wailing,
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an empty
silence fell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset glancing
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. At the day's end they came to a stream that wandered down from the
hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its
banks while the light lasted. It was already night when at last they halted
and made their camp under some stunted alder -trees by the shores of the
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless
backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did
not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night -hours a cold
grey light lay on the land. Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost
in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed,
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used
to much walking on short commons - shorter at any rate than what in the
Shire they would have thought barely enough to keep them on their legs.
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been. 'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go on
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.' 'Do not speak of such things!' said Strider quickly, and with
surprising earnestness. The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or
passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins of old works of stone. By night they had reached the feet of the westward slopes, and there they
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out
from Bree. In the morning they found, for the first time since they had left the
Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed it
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of
the flats to the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there
were lines of large boulders and hewn stones that screened the travellers
almost like a hedge. 'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked
along one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually large and
closely set. 'I am not sure that I like it: it has a - well, rather a
barrow- wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?' 'No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,'
answered Strider. 'The Men of the West did not live here; though in their
latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came
out of Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But
long before, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a great
watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Syl they called it. It was burned and
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown
on the old hill's head. Yet once it was tall and fair. It is told that
Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in
the days of the Last Alliance.' The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry;
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low
voice murmured: Gil-galad was an Elven-king. Of him the harpers sadly sing: the last whose realm was fair and free between the Mountains and the Sea. His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven's field
were mirrored in his silver shield. But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are. The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's. 'Don't stop!' said Merry. 'That's all I know,' stammered Sam, blushing. 'I learned it from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I
was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my
letters. He was mighty book -learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.' 'He did not make it up,' said Strider. 'It is pan of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have
translated it. I never knew that.' 'There was a lot more,' said Sam, 'all about Mordor. I didn't learn
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way
myself!' ’Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!' 'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider. It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the
path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a
grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the
hill They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy
or spy was observing them. Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill. If
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him. On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at
the bottom of which there was a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky. On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a
cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with fire.
About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the
grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but
there was no sign of any living thing. Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round below
them a wide prospect, for the most pan of lands empty and featureless,
except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond which they caught
here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern
side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the West and
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east.
Nothing was moving on it. Following its line eastward with their eyes they
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds. 'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very cheerless and uninviting it
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.' 'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first. He can ride
very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone
on the top of the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if
it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning it in his
fingers. "This has been handled recently,' he said. 'What do you think of
these marks?' On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: 'There seems to he a
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said. 'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,' said
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean
something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use
runes, and they come here sometimes.' 'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry 'I should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he
had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is
so, we must be wary.' 'I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may
mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the
way, in front of us or behind us.' 'Perhaps,' said Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was here, and
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that
we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess
that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own
way to Rivendell, as best we can ' 'How far is Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The world
looked wild and wide from Weathertop. 'I don't know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond the
Forsaken Inn, a day's journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad
to reach their journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know
how long it would take me on my own feet, with fair weather and no ill
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses
the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight's
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.'
'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.' 'It may,' said Strider. They stood for a while silent on the hill -top, near its southward edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading
back westward - to his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks
were moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm. 'Look,' he said, pointing downwards. At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. 'What is it?' he whispered. 'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider. Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright,
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now
overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain;
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill. 'Yes,' said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. 'The
enemy is here!' Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to
find their companions. Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water
in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In
the dell itself they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to
the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small store of firewood neatly
stacked. 'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.' Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. 'I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to
the spring to examine the footprints. 'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back. 'Sam and Pippin
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers
have been here lately. It is they who left the firewood behind. But there
are also several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one
set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot
now be certain, but I think there were many booted feet.' He paused and
stood in anxious thought. Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider led
them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike,
now that he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles
away. 'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?' he asked impatiently. 'It is getting late, and I don't like this hole: it makes my heart sink
somehow.' 'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,' answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at
last, 'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere
better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight
for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen
spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is
here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to
take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.' 'Can the Riders see ?' asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem usually to have
used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.' 'I was too careless on the hill-top,' answered Strider. 'I was very
anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us
to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the
Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They
themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast
shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark
they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are
most to be feared. And at all times they smell the blood of living things,
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We
can feel their presence - it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here,
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.' 'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!' Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said. 'You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as
a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these
Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in
the wilderness.' 'Maybe,' muttered Sam. 'It is also as good a way of saying "here we
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.' Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit a
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and it grew
cold. They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had not eaten
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.
The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places
deserted by all the races of the world. Rangers passed at times beyond the
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their own, and with no help and few
words to spare for strangers. 'I don't see how our food can be made to last,' said Frodo. 'We have
been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but
we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and
perhaps more.' 'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and
I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work,
and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables
of Elrond's house!' The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the edge of
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing quickly into
shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling
stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every
garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe. As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly he
began to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew many
histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the good and evil
deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had
learned all this lore. Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at the end
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you know any more of that old lay that
you spoke of?' 'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo, for it concerns
us closely.' Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the
fire. 'I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,' said Frodo slowly.
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land
of ' 'No!' said Strider interrupting, 'I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.' 'Then tell us some other tale of the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.' 'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said Strider, 'in brief - for
it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may
lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some time, and then he began not to
speak but to chant softly: The leaves were long, the grass was green, The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, And in the glade a light was seen Of stars in shadow shimmering. Tin®viel was dancing there To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair, And in her raiment glimmering. There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves, And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing. He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves, And her hair like shadow following. Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam; And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet, And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening. He heard there oft the flying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves, Or music welling underground, In hidden hollows quavering. Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering. He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering. Her mantle glinted in the moon, As on a hill-top high and far She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering. When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain, And melting water bubbling. He saw the elven-flowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling. Again she fled, but swift he came.
Tin®viel! Tin®viel! He called her by her elvish name; And there she halted listening. One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came, And doom fell on Tin®viel
That in his arms lay glistening. As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair, The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tin®viel the elven-fair, Immortal maiden elven-wise, About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering. Long was the way that fate them bore,
O'er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more, And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ’That is a song,' he
said, 'in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard
to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells
of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was a
mortal man, but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves upon
Middle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that
has ever been among all the children of this world. As the stars above the
mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a
shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was
but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West
coming back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils which
he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was
victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the
forest of Neldoreth. There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade
beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and he named her Tin®viel, that is
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and
they were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron,
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great
Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of the three
Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of L®thien to
Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came
from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of Tin®viel. But she
chose mortality, and to die from the world, so that she might follow him;
and it is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,
long ago, beyond the confines of this world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of
old descended among Men. There live still those of whom L®thien was the
foremother, and it is said that her line shall never fail. Elrond of
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and L®thien was born Dior Thingol’s
heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon his brow. And of Edrendil came the Kings of N®menor, that is
Westernesse.' As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit
in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and
deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over
the crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was climbing
slowly above the hill that overshadowed them, and the stars above the hill-top
faded. The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said Merry.
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.' The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the top of the
hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise. It was
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin
remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill
intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell. 'I don't know what it is,' he said, 'but I suddenly felt afraid. I
durstn't go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something was
creeping up the slope.' 'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet. 'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.' 'I saw something,' said Merry; 'or I thought I did - away westwards
where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the
hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be
moving this way.' 'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!' For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their
backs turned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night.
Frodo stirred, feeling that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out
aloud. 'Hush!' whispered Strider. 'What's that?' gasped Pippin at the same
moment. Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they
felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one. They
strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon there could be no
doubt: three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope,
looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as
of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly
advanced. Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was
swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be
compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and dark,
the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath their black
wrappings. There were five tall figures: two standing on the lip of the
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes;
under their mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were helms
of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. Their eyes fell on
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he drew his own
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. Two of the figures halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair
was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a
long sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that held
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a
pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping
out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last
effort Frodo, dropping his sword, slipped the Ring from his finger and
closed his right hand tight upon it.
Chapter 12 . Flight to the Ford When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately. He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending over him. 'What has happened? Where is the
pale king?' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to
answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes
coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the
grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while
ago. Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side. 'I am not a Black Rider, Sam,' he said gently, 'nor in league with
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I
have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.' When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern, and
shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it. 'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and
walked away, and called Sam to him. 'I think I understand things better
now,' he said in a low voice. 'There seem only to have been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they
expected to be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not
far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that
they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their
will. We shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't despair!' said Strider. 'You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had
guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and
I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a
deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His
friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night
passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned. 'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black cloak
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there
was a slash. 'This was the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish
that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of
Elbereth.' 'And more deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw
that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But
even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only
the hilt in Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he cried. 'It was this accursed knife
that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil
weapons. But I will do what I can.' He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger -hilt laid it on his
knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it
aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could
not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a
plant. 'These leaves,' he said, 'I have walked far to find; for this plant
does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the Road
I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his
fingers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It is fortunate
that I could find it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it grows now sparsely
and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old; and it is not known
in the North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It has great
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.' He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, for
Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side;
but the life did not return to his arm, and he could not raise or use his
hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he
would remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He fell too weak to stand. The others were discussing this very question. They quickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.' As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road, but. it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night,
while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-western
slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were hurrying across they
heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering.
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The
land before them sloped away southwards, but it was wild and pathless;
bushes and stunted trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in
between. The grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the
thickets were faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey
was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down,
and their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and
heavy-hearted. Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again,
but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed, without the
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop
slowly sank, and before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yet
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked
their flight or followed them. They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud- veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did they
feel the sense of present evil that had assailed them before the attack in
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already lost their
trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow
place? At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly
out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended. Strider now
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of
the hills; and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin
sunshine. In the distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley
half-veiled in mist. "I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,' said
Strider. 'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call
Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of
Rivendell, and joins the Loud water away in the South. Some call it the
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is
no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last
Bridge on which the Road crosses.' ’What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,' answered Strider. 'The
Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the
Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water.
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us.' Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider
made them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went
forward to explore. Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he
said, 'and I wonder very much what that means. But I have found something
very strange.' He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it
in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,' he said. 'It is a beryl, an
elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I cannot say;
but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we may pass the
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer
token.' At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety, hearing
no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the
steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon
they were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of
sullen hills. The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon
heights and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who was not walking, had
time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey
and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo
guessed that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot. 'Who lives in this land?' he asked. 'And who built these towers? Is
this troll-country?' 'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil
people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all
were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But
that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow
still lies on the land.' 'Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that
son.' 'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,' said Strider; 'and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.' 'Have
you often been to Rivendell?' said Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt
there once, and still I return when I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the
fair house of Elrond.' The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to
the River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view. The travellers came
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes
of pine-wood. The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled
rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing for Frodo's sake, and
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales. They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind
began to blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant
seas on the dark heads of the hills in fine drenching rain. By nightfall
they were all soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get
any fire to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper
before them, and they were forced to turn away northwards out of their
course. Strider seemed to be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out
from Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It
went on raining. That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock -wall behind them,
in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was
restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more painful than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream,
in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge. In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. The clouds
were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue appeared
between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not start early.
Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he
came back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie
of the land. When he returned he was not reassuring. 'We have come too far to the
north,' he said, 'and we must find some way to turn back southwards again. If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north
of Rivendell. That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but
it would take too long, for I do not know the way, and our food would not
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.' The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground. They
found a passage between two hills that led them into a valley running
south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but towards the end of
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark
edge against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so they
often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for
themselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They had climbed on to a
narrow saddle between two higher points, and the land fell steeply away
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt
as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed
shadowy and dim. 'We cannot go any further,' said Merry to Strider. 'I am afraid this
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we
to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Ri vendell, if we ever
get there?' 'We shall see,' answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do
in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.' 'What is the matter with my master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking
appealingly at Strider. 'His wound was small, and it is already closed. There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.' 'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,' said Strider, 'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!' Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as
if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning
and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought
him in all the hollows of the hill s. The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the light
pale and clear in a rain- washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey
longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light,
Strider took Merry with him and went to survey the country from the height
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightly when he
returned with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the
right direction. If they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from
view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side
nearest to them. 'We must make for the Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only
way to the Ford.' As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly down
the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they had
expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long
Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an
unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many
jolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose again. Even Frodo felt
better in the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes. Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned round and
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed with many
windings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In
places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a path made
by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there old trees had been cut or
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came
into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming
out of a belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply
to the left round the comer of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came
to the comer they looked round and saw that the path ran on over a level
strip under the face of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little
wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots. 'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!' said Pippin.
’Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made the path -
and we had better get off it quick.’ 'There is no need, I think,' said Strider, coining out. 'It is
certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don't
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.' The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both
looked terrified. 'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not
far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are very
large!' 'We will come and look at them,' said Strider, picking up a stick. Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-stripped
branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of light. They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the tree-trunks,
holding their breath. There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and
broke his stick upon the stooping troll. Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits,
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said. 'We are forgetting our family
history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf,
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew
the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact
he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them
to life again. 'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew
about trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with a bright sun, and
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for
us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a
live troll!' They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs. 'Won't somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.' 'Not since Weathertop,' said Frodo. The others looked at him. 'Don't
worry about me!' he added. 'I feel much better, but I don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more stored in your head than you
let on about.' 'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But
these old images here brought it to my mind.' Standing up, with his hands
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; For many a year he had gnawed it near, For meat was hard to come by. Done by! Gum by! In a case in the hills he dwelt alone, And meat was hard to come by. Up came Tom with his big boots on. Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon? For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, As should be a-lyin ' in graveyard. Caveyard! Paveyard! This many a year has Tim been gone, And I thought he were lyin ' in graveyard. ' 'My lad, ' said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead, Afore I found his shinbone. Tinbone! Thinbone! He can spare a share for a poor old troll, For he don't need his shinbone. ' Said Tom: 7 don't see why the likes o' thee
Without axin ' leave should go makin 'free
With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
So hand the old bone over! Rover! Trover! Though dead he be, it belongs to he; So hand the old bone over!' 'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins,
'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! I'll try my teeth on thee now. Hee now! See now! I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins; I've a mind to dine on thee now. ' But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught. Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to lam him. Warn him! Darn him! A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to lam him. But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
For the seat of a troll don 't feel it. Peel it! Heal it! Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.
Tom's leg is game, since home he came, And his bootless foot is lasting lame; But Troll don't care, and he's still there With the bone he boned from its owner. Doner! Boner! Troll's old seat is still the same, And the bone he boned from its owner! 'Well, that's a warning to us all!' laughed Merry. 'It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!' 'Where did you come by that, Sam?' asked Pippin. 'I've never heard
those words before.' Sam muttered something inaudible. 'It's out of his own head, of
course,' said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!' 'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably
following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank
above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford
and the Mountains. Not far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the
grass. On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 'There!' said Merry. 'That must be the stone that marked the place
where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?' Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home no
treasure more perilous, nor less easy to pan with. 'None at all,' he said. 'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it
came from robbers.' The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There was
no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no other
possible course for them to take, they climbed down the bank, and turning
left went off as fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off
the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet them
from the mountains ahead. They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where they
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought sudden fear
back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them. They looked back,
but they could not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light, some
thirty feel below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They were going
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly, as if it was blown
away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of
small bells tinkling. That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening
intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not, but they all
remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long
that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was
now leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a
look of joy on his face. The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the quick trotting
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows,
running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if it
were studded with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in the
wind of his speed. To Frodo it appeared that a white light was shining
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road, leaping
with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved or called, the
rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up towards the thicket
where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear
ringing voice left no doubt in their hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No
others that dwelt in the wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there
seemed to be a note of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider. Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes and
hurried down to the Road. 'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of
Elrond,' said Strider. 'Hail, and well met at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the
road.' 'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully. 'No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered
Glorfindel. 'Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred,
journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,* learned that things were
amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine
were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that
can ride openly against the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out
north, west, and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness. 'It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of
Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of the
servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and I pursued
them westward. I came also upon two others, but they turned away southward.
Since then I have searched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, and
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here
we must risk the peril of the Road and go. There are five behind us, and
when they find your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the
wind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened. Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the
mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm. 'My master is sick and wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He can't go on
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.' Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently
in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety. Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and
of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at
it. 'There are evil things written on this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe
your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach the house of
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can - but all the
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.' He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his
face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the
chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed
to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his
friends' faces more clearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength
returned. 'You shall ride my horse,' said Glorfindel. 'I will shorten the
stirrups up to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But
you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him
to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he
will bear you away with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy
cannot rival.' 'No, he will not!' said Frodo. 'I shall not ride him, if I am to be
carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in
danger.' Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would
be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and
leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that
brings us all in peril.' To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's
white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed;
but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless
feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, and still on
under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that
time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream. They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the
road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have closed
their eyes when Glorfindel, who had set himself to watch while they slept,
awoke them again. The sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the
clouds and mists of the night were gone. 'Drink this!' said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in turn a
little liquor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It was clear as
spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm in
the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as
they drank it. Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. They had rested rather less than five hours when they took to the Road
again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts
during the day's march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before
nightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down
towards the bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen. So
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or
hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment, if they
lagged behind, and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs. Frodo's
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows of
ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the world
seemed less pale and empty. The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and
they hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. 'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' said
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in
places much grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when they
could, to ease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a place
where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes
ran along as they hurried forward; and there seemed to be a sound of many
footfalls following their own. All at once, as if through a gate of light,
the Road ran out again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at
the bottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long flat mile, and
beyond that the Ford of Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown
bank, threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind
them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through the
branches of the pines. One moment Glorfindel turned and listened, then he
sprang forward with a loud cry. 'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!’ The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorfindel and Strider followed as rear -guard. They were only half way
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of
the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined
his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and
then another; then again two more. ’Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo. He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking
the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders seemed to sit
upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill, dark and
solid, while all the woods and land about them receded as if into a mist.
Suddenly he knew in his heart that they were silently commanding him to
wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it. 'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called
to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the
last lap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped down the
hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had
heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and
rocks away on the left four other Riders came flying. Two rode towards
Frodo: two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as
their courses converged with his. Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer
see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great
steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the
Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black
cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they
called to him with fell voices. Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No
cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The wind
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a
flash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed right
before the face of the foremost Rider. Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse
halted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at the
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before the threat of their
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at
the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and
brandished his sword. 'Go back!' he cried. 'Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no
more! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders
halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To
Mordor we will take you!' ’Go back!' he whispered. The Ring! The Ring!' they cried with deadly voices; and immediately
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two
others. 'By Elbereth and L®thien the Fair,' said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in
his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his
tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of loud
waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and
down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames
seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three
Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew
back in dismay. With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure
of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms waving flames, that
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in
terror they bore their riders into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo
felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.
* BOOK II * Chapter 1 . Many Meetings Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge
of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a
waterfall. 'Where am I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the ceiling. 'In
the House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in the morning.' said a voice. 'It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 'Gandalf!' cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window. 'Yes,' he said, 'I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.' Frodo lay down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now,
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut'
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness
in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window. 'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?' 'Yes, they are all safe and sound,' answered Gandalf. 'Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 'What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. 'It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.’ 'Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,' answered Gandalf. 'The
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have
been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you
showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous
moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.' 'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. 'I have not spoken
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and
it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry!
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and
of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such
dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 'We should never have done it without Strider,' said Frodo. 'But we
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin. And
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything
today, by Elrond's orders.' 'But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as
tiring,’ said Frodo. ’I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things
that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at
least.' 'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have
a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say
that I was held captive.' 'You?' cried Frodo. 'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There are many
powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am.
Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 'Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?’ 'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But
I did not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at
once. I heard news of them only after I left you in June; but that story
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' 'Yes,' said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel.'
Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam,' he said. 'He has no more
doubts now.' 'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange,
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders.' 'You don't know much even about them, if you think old Barliman is
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less
than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as
they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder. 'I thought they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger.' 'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. 'My dear Frodo, that is just what the
Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of
the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at
rest.' 'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But so far my only thought has been to
get here; and I hope I shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has
been as much as I want.' He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have
been reckoning,' he said, 'and I can't bring the total up to October the
twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the
Ford by the twentieth.' 'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.
'How do the side and shoulder feel now?’ ’I don't know.' Frodo answered. 'They don't feel at all: which is an
improvement, but'— he made an effort— 'I can move my arm again a little.
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left
hand with his right.
'Good!' said Gandalf. "It is mending fast. You will soon be sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were
brought in.' 'Days?' said Frodo. 'Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought you
from this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has
hardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a
master of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the
truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried, and it was
working inwards.' Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that
had vanished in Strider's hands. 'Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf. 'It is
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would
quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen
days.’ 'What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. 'What were the Riders
trying to do?’ 'They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains in
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like they are, only
weaker and under their command. You would have became a wraith under
the dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for trying to
keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it
and seeing it on his hand.' 'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!' said Frodo
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf, 'not to mention
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced;
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow
shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for
then you were half in the wraith- world yourself, and they might have seized
you. You could see them, and they could see you.’ 'I know,' said Frodo. 'They were terrible to behold! But why could we
all see their horses?' 'Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes
that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have dealings
with the living.' 'Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other animals
are terrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’ 'Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are ores and
trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are
many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.’ 'What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’ 'Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never again will they listen to
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still some of his chief
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realm
live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Unseen they
have great power.' 'I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the
mighty of the Firstborn. Lie is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while:
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind
in the Shire. But all such places will soon become islands under siege, if
things go on as they are going. The Dark Lord is putting forth all his
strength. 'Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin, while
his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, 'we must keep up our
courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death. You are in
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 'I haven't any courage to keep up,' said Frodo, 'but I am not worried
at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the
affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the
present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be
able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were clear, and fully
awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed to be little wrong with
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were
of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay
outside upon the coverlet. 'Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. 'He is not half
through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can
foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 'You look splendid,' he said aloud. 'I will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again.
This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight for
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any
longer: you had become visible to them, being already on the threshold of
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save
you, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake,
and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could
not with stand all the Nine at once. 'When the Ring wraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind. Close to
the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted
trees. There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood
would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the flood
appeared, he rushed out, followed by Aragorn and the. others with flaming
brands. Caught between fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness.
Three were carried away by the first assault of the flood; the others were
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished, and without them
they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easily
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your
face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse was
standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that you
were dead, or worse. Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards
Ri vendell. ' 'Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 'Elrond commanded it,' answered Gandalf. 'The river of this valley is
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the
Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the
flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you
may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white
horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding
boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty
Mountains.' 'Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: 'the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But
now we are safe!' Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 'Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour.' 'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble
and show me so much kindness.’ 'Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf, smiling. 'I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.’ 'Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. 'I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow
jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast
asleep. Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a pleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for
weariness, fear, and sadness. As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he no
longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and
probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and
discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had
been. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted him
excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner
reflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire;
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 'Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently
and then he blushed and turned hastily away. 'Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo. 'It's warm!' said Sam. 'Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 'I am ready,' said Frodo. 'Let's go and look for the rest of the
party!' 'I can take you to them, sir,' said Sam. 'It's a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like
kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 'I know what you have been doing, Sam,' said Frodo, taking his arm.
'But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come
on, guide me round the corners!' Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a
high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting
in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the
valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud,
and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if
summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens. 'Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing up. 'Here is our noble cousin! Make
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' 'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. 'Evil
things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’ 'Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin. 'He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to
feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the
right song for the occasion.’ 'I feel like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. 'Though at the moment I
feel more like eating and drinking!’ 'That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. 'You have shown your usual
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’ 'More than meal! A feast!’ said Merry. 'As soon as Gandalf reported
that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. The hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf. Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other
two; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged
face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could
leap suddenly into fire. Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in his hand was
strength. The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was
written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark
as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale
as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon,
and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that
she was one of his close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids
of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face
were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes,
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge
were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen,
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L®thien had
come on earth again; and she was called Undumiel, for she was the Evenstar
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin, in Lurien
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her
father's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon
errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North,
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the ores. Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he
had a seat at Elrond' s table among all these folk so high and fair. Though
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very
small, and rather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.
Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as the
snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 'Welcome and well met!' said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then he
actually rose from his seat and bowed. 'Gluin at your service,' he said, and
bowed still lower. 'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family's,' said Frodo
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 'Am I right in
guessing that you are the Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the great
Thorin Oaken shield?' 'Quite right,' answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 'And I do not ask, for I
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.' 'Thank you very much,’ said Frodo. 'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,' said Gluin. 'I
wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like
it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,' said Frodo
politely. He guessed that even in Elrond's house the matter of the Ring was not
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a
time. 'But I am equally curious,' he added, 'to learn what brings so
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I think we will not speak
yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe,
and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be
told.' Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring,
seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Gluin had much to tell of
events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn
the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither ore nor wolf dared to go. 'Indeed,' said Gluin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage
from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible. They are
valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his head; 'and like Beorn of old
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of
Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman
rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 'There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gluin; 'yet it is mostly
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of
these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you tidings
gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves' tongues run on when
speaking of their handiwork, they say.' And with that Gluin embarked on a long account of the doings of the
Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject,
though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to
hear that Dbin was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having
passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven were
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. A shadow passed over Gluin's face. 'We do not know,' he answered. 'It
is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' Gluin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. 'We have done
well,' he said. 'But in metalwork we cannot rival our fathers, many of
whose, secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should
see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You
should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and
cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we
have not been idle.’ 'I will come and see them, if ever I can,' said Frodo. 'How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!' Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?' he asked. 'Yes,' answered Frodo. 1 would rather see him than all the towers and
palaces in the world.' At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down
the hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrown
open, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and came
into a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. 'This is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard. 'Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light.' As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvish
minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo
looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together;
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly
he noticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the
ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was
ill (if people were ever ill in Ri vendell), and had been unable to come to the
feast. His head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark
cloak was drawn over his face. Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. 'Awake little
master, he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.
'Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,' he said.
'Here is a friend that you have long missed.' The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 'Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 'Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. 'So you have got here at last. I
hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' 'Why weren't you there?' cried Frodo. 'And why haven't I been allowed
to see you before?' 'Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by
your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast' I don't go in for such
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 'What were you doing?’ 'Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said, cocking an
eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness
that Frodo could see. 'Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want
to know, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you have
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or
two, and was thinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get
them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be
driven clean out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to
help me. Where is he?' Elrond laughed. 'He shall be found,' he said. 'Then you two shall go
into a corner and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the
time towards Ri vendell. 'I got here without much adventure,' he said, 'and
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of my book.
And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether. 'I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the
South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring, of
course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a great deal,
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here
myself long ago without so much trouble. I have thought several times of
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me tottering about in the Wild. 'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good
to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of
remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.' He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully. 'Have you got it here?' he asked in a whisper. I can't help feeling
curious, you know, after all I've heard. I should very much like just to
peep at it again.' 'Yes, I've got it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. 'It
looks just the same as ever it did.' 'Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his
distress and amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through it he found himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him. The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. 'I
understand now,' he said. 'Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in
for this burden: sorry about everything. Don't adventures ever have an end? I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't
be helped. I wonder if it's any good trying to finish my book? But don't
let's worry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell me all about the
Shire!' Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred
of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo
smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the
smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four
Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. Suddenly Bilbo looked up. 'Ah, there you are at last, D®nadan!’ he
cried. 'Strider!' said Frodo. 'You seem to have a lot of names.' 'Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. 'What do you call him that for?’ 'They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, 'and that is how I
was introduced to him.' 'And why do you call him D®nadan?’ asked Frodo. ' The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. 'Fie is often called that here. But I thought
you knew enough Elvish at least to know d®n-udan: Man of the West,
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He turned to Strider. 'Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Fady
Arwen was there.' Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. 'I know,' he said. 'But often I
must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' 'Well, my dear fellow,' said Bilbo, 'now you've heard the news, can't
you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent. Elrond says
this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am
stuck. Fet's go off into a corner and polish it up!' Strider smiled. 'Come then!' he said. 'Fet me hear it!’ Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He
was alone and felt rather forlorn' although all about him the folk of
Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the
music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no heed to anything
else. Frodo began to listen. At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in
elven-tongues, even though he understood them little' held him in a spell,
as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took
shape, and visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet
imagined opened out before him; and the firelit hall became like a golden
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the
enchantment became more and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless
river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous
for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air
about him, and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into running
water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the voice of Bilbo
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. Edrendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;
her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow was fashioned like a swan,
and light upon her banners laid. In panoply of ancient kings,
in chain, d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald. Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,
bewildered on enchanted ways
beyond the days of mortal lands. From gnashing of the Narrow Ice
where shadow lies on frozen hills,
from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving still
on starless waters far astray
at last he came to Night of Naught,
and passed, and never sight he saw
of shining shore nor light he sought. The winds of wrath came driving him,
and blindly in the foam he fled
from west to east and errandless,
unheralded he homeward sped. There flying Elwing came to him,
and flame was in the darkness lit;
more bright than light of diamond
the fire upon her carcanet. The Silmaril she bound on him
and crowned him with the living light
and dauntless then with burning brow
he turned his prow; and in the night
from Otherworld beyond the Sea
there strong and free a storm arose,
a wind of power in Tarmenel;
by paths that seldom mortal goes
his boat it bore with biting breath
as might of death across the grey
and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away. Through Evernight he back was borne
on black and roaring waves that ran
o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores
that drowned before the Days began,
until he heard on strands of pearl
when ends the world the music long,
where ever foaming billows roll
the yellow gold and jewels wan. He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamar
beheld afar beyond the seas. A wanderer escaped from night
to haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fair
where keen the air, where pale as glass
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheer
the lamplit towers ofTirion
are mirrored on the Shadowmere. He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.
They clothed him then in elven-white,
and seven lights before him sent,
as through the Calacirian
to hidden land forlorn he went. He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns the Elder King
in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken then
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein. A ship then new they built for him
of mithril and of elven-glass
with shining prow; no shaven oar
nor sail she bore on silver mast:
the Silmaril as lantern light
and banner bright with living flame
to gleam thereon by Elbereth
herself was set, who thither came
and wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,
to sail the shoreless skies and come
behind the Sun and light of Moon. From Evereven's lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fall
his wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. From World's End then he turned away
and yearned again to find afar
his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant flame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawn
where grey the Norland waters run. And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping sore
of women and of elven-maids
in Elder Days, in years of yore,
gut on him mighty doom was laid,
till Moon should fade, an orb,d star
to pass, and tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never rest
to bear his shining lamp afar,
the Flammifer of Westernesse. The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was
seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and
applauding. 'Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf.
