Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
most convenient and I used it. I repeat: The Dark
Lord does not complain that I stayed, so I do not see
why you do. “I think you next wanted to know,” he pressed on, a
little more loudly, for Bellatrix showed every sign of
interrupting, “why I stood between the Dark Lord and
the Sorcerer’s Stone. That is easily answered. He did
not know whether he could trust me. He thought, like
you, that I had turned from faithful Death Eater to
Dumbledore’s stooge. He was in a pitiable condition,
very weak, sharing the body of a mediocre wizard. He
did not dare reveal himself to a former ally if that ally
might turn him over to Dumbledore or the Ministry. I
deeply regret that he did not trust me. He would have
returned to power three years sooner. As it was, I saw
only greedy and unworthy Quirrell attempting to steal
the stone and, I admit, I did all I could to thwart him.” Bellatrix’s mouth twisted as though she had taken an
unpleasant dose of medicine. “But you didn’t return when he came back, you didn’t
fly back to him at once when you felt the Dark Mark
burn — ” “Correct. I returned two hours later. I returned on
Dumbledore’s orders.” “On Dumbledore’s — ?” she began, in tones of
outrage. “Think!” said Snape, impatient again. “Think! By
waiting two hours, just two hours, I ensured that I
could remain at Hogwarts as a spy! By allowing
Dumbledore to think that I was only returning to the
Dark Lord’s side because I was ordered to, I have
been able to pass information on Dumbledore and the
Order of the Phoenix ever since! Consider, Bellatrix:
The Dark Mark had been growing stronger for
months. I knew he must be about to return, all the
Death Eaters knew! I had plenty of time to think
about what I wanted to do, to plan my next move, to
escape like Karkaroff, didn’t I? “The Dark Lord’s initial displeasure at my lateness
vanished entirely, I assure you, when I explained that
I remained faithful, although Dumbledore thought I
was his man. Yes, the Dark Lord thought that I had
left him forever, but he was wrong.” “But what use have you been?” sneered Bellatrix.
“What useful information have we had from you?” “My information has been conveyed directly to the
Dark Lord,” said Snape. “If he chooses not to share it
with you — ” “He shares everything with me!” said Bellatrix, firing
up at once. “He calls me his most loyal, his most
faithful — ” “Does he?” said Snape, his voice delicately inflected to
suggest his disbelief. “Does he still, after the fiasco at
the Ministry?” “That was not my fault!” said Bellatrix, flushing. “The
Dark Lord has, in the past, entrusted me with his
most precious — if Lucius hadn’t — ” “Don’t you dare — don’t you dare blame my
husband!” said Narcissa, in a low and deadly voice,
looking up at her sister. “There is no point apportioning blame,” said Snape
smoothly. “What is done, is done.”
“But not by you!” said Bellatrix furiously. “No, you
were once again absent while the rest of us ran
dangers, were you not, Snape?” “My orders were to remain behind,” said Snape.
“Perhaps you disagree with the Dark Lord, perhaps
you think that Dumbledore would not have noticed if
I had joined forces with the Death Eaters to fight the
Order of the Phoenix? And — forgive me — you speak
of dangers ... you were facing six teenagers, were you
not?” “They were joined, as you very well know, by half of
the Order before long!” snarled Bellatrix. “And, while
we are on the subject of the Order, you still claim you
cannot reveal the whereabouts of their headquarters,
don’t you?” “I am not the Secret-Keeper; I cannot speak the name
of the place. You understand how the enchantment
works, I think? The Dark Lord is satisfied with the
information I have passed him on the Order. It led, as
perhaps you have guessed, to the recent capture and
murder of Emmeline Vance, and it certainly helped
dispose of Sirius Black, though I give you full credit
for finishing him off.” He inclined his head and toasted her. Her expression
did not soften. “You are avoiding my last question, Snape. Harry
Potter. You could have killed him at any point in the
past five years. You have not done it. Why?” “Have you discussed this matter with the Dark Lord?”
asked Snape. “He ... lately, we ... I am asking you, Snape!”
“If I had murdered Harry Potter, the Dark Lord could
not have used his blood to regenerate, making him
invincible — ” “You claim you foresaw his use of the boy!” she
jeered. “I do not claim it; I had no idea of his plans; I have
already confessed that I thought the Dark Lord dead. I am merely trying to explain why the Dark Lord is
not sorry that Potter survived, at least until a year
ago. ...” “But why did you keep him alive?” “Have you not understood me? It was only
Dumbledore’s protection that was keeping me out of
Azkaban! Do you disagree that murdering his favorite
student might have turned him against me? But there
was more to it than that. I should remind you that
when Potter first arrived at Hogwarts there were still
many stories circulating about him, rumors that he
himself was a great Dark wizard, which was how he
had survived the Dark Lord’s attack. Indeed, many of
the Dark Lord’s old followers thought Potter might be
a standard around which we could all rally once
more. I was curious, I admit it, and not at all inclined
to murder him the moment he set foot in the castle. “Of course, it became apparent to me very quickly
that he had no extraordinary talent at all. He has
fought his way out of a number of tight corners by a
simple combination of sheer luck and more talented
friends. He is mediocre to the last degree, though as
obnoxious and self-satisfied as was his father before
him. I have done my utmost to have him thrown out
of Hogwarts, where I believe he scarcely belongs, but
kill him, or allow him to be killed in front of me? I
would have been a fool to risk it with Dumbledore
close at hand.” “And through all this we are supposed to believe
Dumbledore has never suspected you?” asked
Bellatrix. “He has no idea of your true allegiance, he
trusts you implicitly still?” “I have played my part well,” said Snape. “And you
overlook Dumbledore’s greatest weakness: He has to
believe the best of people. I spun him a tale of deepest
remorse when I joined his staff, fresh from my Death
Eater days, and he embraced me with open arms —
though, as I say, never allowing me nearer the Dark
Arts than he could help. Dumbledore has been a
great wizard — oh yes, he has,” (for Bellatrix had
made a scathing noise), “the Dark Lord acknowledges
it. I am pleased to say, however, that Dumbledore is
growing old. The duel with the Dark Lord last month
shook him. He has since sustained a serious injury
because his reactions are slower than they once were.
But through all these years, he has never stopped
trusting Severus Snape, and therein lies my great
value to the Dark Lord.” Bellatrix still looked unhappy, though she appeared
unsure how best to attack Snape next. Taking
advantage of her silence, Snape turned to her sister. “Now ... you came to ask me for help, Narcissa?” Narcissa looked up at him, her face eloquent with
despair. “Yes, Severus. I — I think you are the only one who
can help me, I have nowhere else to turn. Lucius is in
jail and ...”
She closed her eyes and two large tears seeped from
beneath her eyelids. “The Dark Lord has forbidden me to speak of it,”
Narcissa continued, her eyes still closed. “He wishes
none to know of the plan. It is ... very secret. But — ” “If he has forbidden it, you ought not to speak,” said
Snape at once. “The Dark Lord’s word is law.” Narcissa gasped as though he had doused her with
cold water. Bellatrix looked satisfied for the first time
since she had entered the house. “There!” she said triumphantly to her sister. “Even
Snape says so: You were told not to talk, so hold your
silence!” But Snape had gotten to his feet and strode to the
small window, peered through the curtains at the
deserted street, then closed them again with a jerk. He turned around to face Narcissa, frowning. “It so happens that I know of the plan,” he said in a
low voice. “I am one of the few the Dark Lord has told.
Nevertheless, had I not been in on the secret, Narcissa, you would have been guilty of great
treachery to the Dark Lord.” “I thought you must know about it!” said Narcissa,
breathing more freely. “He trusts you so, Severus. ...” “You know about the plan?” said Bellatrix, her fleeting
expression of satisfaction replaced by a look of
outrage. “ You know?” “Certainly,” said Snape. “But what help do you
require, Narcissa? If you are imagining I can persuade
the Dark Lord to change his mind, I am afraid there is
no hope, none at all.” “Severus,” she whispered, tears sliding down her pale
cheeks. “My son ... my only son ...” “Draco should be proud,” said Bellatrix indifferently.
“The Dark Lord is granting him a great honor. And I
will say this for Draco: He isn’t shrinking away from
his duty, he seems glad of a chance to prove himself,
excited at the prospect — ” Narcissa began to cry in earnest, gazing beseechingly
all the while at Snape. “That’s because he is sixteen and has no idea what
lies in store! Why, Severus? Why my son? It is too
dangerous! This is vengeance for Lucius’s mistake, I
know it!” Snape said nothing. He looked away from the sight of
her tears as though they were indecent, but he could
not pretend not to hear her. “That’s why he’s chosen Draco, isn’t it?” she
persisted. “To punish Lucius?” “If Draco succeeds,” said Snape, still looking away
from her, “he will be honored above all others.” “But he won’t succeed!” sobbed Narcissa. “How can
he, when the Dark Lord himself — ?” Bellatrix gasped; Narcissa seemed to lose her nerve. “I only meant ... that nobody has yet succeeded. ...
Severus ... please ... You are, you have always been,
Draco’s favorite teacher. ... You are Lucius’s old
friend. ... I beg you. ... You are the Dark Lord’s
favorite, his most trusted advisor. ... Will you speak to
him, persuade him — ?” “The Dark Lord will not be persuaded, and I am not
stupid enough to attempt it,” said Snape flatly. “I
cannot pretend that the Dark Lord is not angry with
Lucius. Lucius was supposed to be in charge. He got
himself captured, along with how many others, and
failed to retrieve the prophecy into the bargain. Yes,
the Dark Lord is angry, Narcissa, very angry indeed.” “Then I am right, he has chosen Draco in revenge!”
choked Narcissa. “He does not mean him to succeed,
he wants him to be killed trying!” When Snape said nothing, Narcissa seemed to lose
what little self-restraint she still possessed. Standing
up, she staggered to Snape and seized the front of his
robes. Her face close to his, her tears falling onto his
chest, she gasped, “You could do it. You could do it
instead of Draco, Severus. You would succeed, of
course you would, and he would reward you beyond
all of us — ” Snape caught hold of her wrists and removed her
clutching hands. Looking down into her tears tained
face, he said slowly, “He intends me to do it in the
end, I think. But he is determined that Draco should
try first. You see, in the unlikely event that Draco
succeeds, I shall be able to remain at Hogwarts a little
longer, fulfilling my useful role as spy.” “In other words, it doesn’t matter to him if Draco is
killed!” “The Dark Lord is very angry,” repeated Snape
quietly. “He failed to hear the prophecy. You know as
well as I do, Narcissa, that he does not forgive easily.”
She crumpled, falling at his feet, sobbing and
moaning on the floor. “My only son ... my only son ...” “You should be proud!” said Bellatrix ruthlessly. “If I
had sons, I would be glad to give them up to the
service of the Dark Lord!” Narcissa gave a little scream of despair and clutched
at her long blonde hair. Snape stooped, seized her by
the arms, lifted her up, and steered her back onto the
sofa. He then poured her more wine and forced the
glass into her hand. “Narcissa, that’s enough. Drink this. Listen to me.” She quieted a little; slopping wine down herself, she
took a shaky sip. “It might be possible ... for me to help Draco.” She sat up, her face paper-white, her eyes huge. “Severus — oh, Severus — you would help him? Would you look after him, see he comes to no harm?” “I can try.” She flung away her glass; it skidded across the table
as she slid off the sofa into a kneeling position at
Snape ’s feet, seized his hand in both of hers, and
pressed her lips to it. “If you are there to protect him ... Severus, will you
swear it? Will you make the Unbreakable Vow?” “The Unbreakable Vow?”  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
Snape’s expression was blank, unreadable. Bellatrix,
however, let out a cackle of triumphant laughter. “Aren’t you listening, Narcissa? Oh, he’ll try, I’m sure.
... The usual empty words, the usual slithering out of
action ... oh, on the Dark Lord’s orders, of course!” Snape did not look at Bellatrix. His black eyes were
fixed upon Narcissa’s tear-filled blue ones as she
continued to clutch his hand. “Certainly, Narcissa, I shall make the Unbreakable
Vow,” he said quietly. “Perhaps your sister will
consent to be our Bonder.” Bellatrix’s mouth fell open. Snape lowered himself so
that he was kneeling opposite Narcissa. Beneath
Bellatrix’s astonished gaze, they grasped right hands. “You will need your wand, Bellatrix,” said Snape
coldly. She drew it, still looking astonished. “And you will need to move a little closer,” he said. She stepped forward so that she stood over them, and
placed the tip of her wand on their linked hands. Narcissa spoke. “Will you, Severus, watch over my son, Draco, as he
attempts to fulfill the Dark Lord’s wishes?” “I will,” said Snape. A thin tongue of brilliant flame issued from the wand
and wound its way around their hands like a red-hot
wire.  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“And will you, to the best of your ability, protect him
from harm?” “I will,” said Snape. A second tongue of flame shot from the wand and
interlinked with the first, making a fine, glowing
chain. “And, should it prove necessary ... if it seems Draco
will fail ...” whispered Narcissa (Snape’s hand
twitched within hers, but he did not draw away), “will
you carry out the deed that the Dark Lord has
ordered Draco to perform?” There was a moment’s silence. Bellatrix watched, her
wand upon their clasped hands, her eyes wide. “I will,” said Snape. Bellatrix’s astounded face glowed red in the blaze of a
third tongue of flame, which shot from the wand,
twisted with the others, and bound itself thickly
around their clasped hands, like a rope, like a fiery
snake.
WILL AND WON’T Harry Potter was snoring loudly. He had been sitting
in a chair beside his bedroom window for the best
part of four hours, staring out at the darkening street,
and had finally fallen asleep with one side of his face
pressed against the cold windowpane, his glasses
askew and his mouth wide open. The misty fug his
breath had left on the window sparkled in the orange
glare of the streetlamp outside, and the artificial light
drained his face of all color, so that he looked ghostly
beneath his shock of untidy black hair. The room was strewn with various possessions and a
good smattering of rubbish. Owl feathers, apple cores,
and sweet wrappers littered the floor, a number of
spellbooks lay higgledy-piggledy among the tangled
robes on his bed, and a mess of newspapers sat in a
puddle of light on his desk. The headline of one
blared: HARRY POTTER: THE CHOSEN ONE?  Rumors continue to fly about the mysterious recent
disturbance at the Ministry of Magic, during which
He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was sighted once more. “We’re not allowed to talk about it, don’t ask me
anything,” said one agitated Obliviator, who refused
to give his name as he left the Ministry last night. Nevertheless, highly placed sources within the
Ministry have confirmed that the disturbance
centered on the fabled Hall of Prophecy. Though Ministry spokeswizards have hitherto refused
even to confirm the existence of such a place, a
growing number of the Wizarding community believe
that the Death Eaters now serving sentences in
Azkaban for trespass and attempted theft were
attempting to steal a prophecy. The nature of that
prophecy is unknown, although speculation is rife
that it concerns Harry Potter, the only person ever
known to have survived the Killing Curse, and who is
also known to have been at the Ministry on the night
in question. Some are going so far as to call Potter
“the Chosen One,” believing that the prophecy names
him as the only one who will be able to rid us of He-
Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. The current whereabouts of the prophecy, if it exists,
are unknown, although (ctd. page , column ) A second newspaper lay beside the first. This one bore
the headline: SCRIMGEOUR SUCCEEDS FUDGE Most of this front page was taken up with a large
black-and-white picture of a man with a lionlike mane
of thick hair and a rather ravaged face. The picture
was moving — the man was waving at the ceiling.
Rufus Scrimgeour, previously Head of the Auror office
in the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, has
succeeded Cornelius Fudge as Minister of Magic. The
appointment has largely been greeted with
enthusiasm by the Wizarding community, though
rumors of a rift between the new Minister and Albus
Dumbledore, newly reinstated Chief Warlock of the
Wizengamot, surfaced within hours of Scrimgeour
taking office. Scrimgeour’s representatives admitted that he had met
with Dumbledore at once upon taking possession of the
top job, but refused to comment on the topics under
discussion. Albus Dumbledore is known to (ctd. page
, column ) To the left of this paper sat another, which had been
folded so that a story bearing the title MINISTRY
GUARANTEES STUDENTS’ SAFETY was visible. Newly appointed Minister of Magic, Rufus
Scrimgeour, spoke today of the tough new measures
taken by his Ministry to ensure the safety of students
returning to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and
Wizardry this autumn. “For obvious reasons, the Ministry will not be going
into detail about its stringent new security plans,”
said the Minister, although an insider confirmed that
measures include defensive spells and charms, a
complex array of countercurses, and a small task
force of Aurors dedicated solely to the protection of
Hogwarts School. Most seem reassured by the new Minister’s tough
stand on student safety. Said Mrs. Augusta
Longbottom, “My grandson, Neville — a good friend of
Harry Potter’s, incidentally, who fought the Death
Eaters alongside him at the Ministry in June and —
But the rest of this story was obscured by the large
birdcage standing on top of it. Inside it was a
magnificent snowy owl. Her amber eyes surveyed the
room imperiously, her head swiveling occasionally to
gaze at her snoring master. Once or twice she clicked
her beak impatiently, but Harry was too deeply asleep
to hear her. A large trunk stood in the very middle of the room. Its
lid was open; it looked expectant; yet it was almost
empty but for a residue of old underwear, sweets,
empty ink bottles, and broken quills that coated the
very bottom. Nearby, on the floor, lay a purple leaflet
emblazoned with the words: — ISSUED ON BEHALF OF — THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC PROTECTING YOUR HOME AND FAMILY AGAINST DARK FORCES The Wizarding community is currently under threat
from an organization calling itself the Death Eaters.
Observing the following simple security guidelines will
help protect you, your family, and your home from
attack. . You are advised not to leave the house alone. . Particular care should be taken during the
hours of darkness. Wherever possible, arrange to
complete journeys before night has fallen. . Review the security arrangements around your
house, making sure that all family members are
aware of emergency measures such as Shield and
Disillusionment Charms, and, in the case of underage
family members, Side-Along-Apparition. . Agree on security questions with close friends
and family so as to detect Death Eaters masquerading
as others by use of the Polyjuice Potion (see page ). . Should you feel that a family member,
colleague, friend, or neighbor is acting in a strange
manner, contact the Magical Law Enforcement Squad
at once. They may have been put under the Imperius
Curse (see page ). . Should the Dark Mark appear over any dwelling
place or other building, DO NOT ENTER, but contact
the Auror office immediately. . Unconfirmed sightings suggest that the Death
Eaters may now be using Inferi (see page ). Any
sighting of an Inferius, or encounter with same,
should be reported to the Ministry IMMEDIATELY. Harry grunted in his sleep and his face slid down the
window an inch or so, making his glasses still more
lopsided, but he did not wake up. An alarm clock,
repaired by Harry several years ago, ticked loudly on
the sill, showing one minute to eleven. Beside it, held
in place by Harry’s relaxed hand, was a piece of
parchment covered in thin, slanting writing. Harry
had read this letter so often since its arrival three
days ago that although it had been delivered in a
tightly furled scroll, it now lay quite flat. Dear Harry, If it is convenient to you, I shall call at number four,
Privet Drive this coming Friday at eleven p.m. to escort
you to the Burrow, where you have been invited to
spend the remainder of your school holidays.
If you are agreeable, I should also be glad of your
assistance in a matter to which I hope to attend on the
way to the Burrow. I shall explain this more fully when
I see you. Kindly send your answer by return of this owl. Hoping
to see you this Friday, I am, yours most sincerely, Albus Dumbledore Though he already knew it by heart, Harry had been
stealing glances at this missive every few minutes
since seven o’clock that evening, when he had first
taken up his position beside his bedroom window,
which had a reasonable view of both ends of Privet
Drive. He knew it was pointless to keep rereading
Dumbledore ’s words; Harry had sent back his “yes”
with the delivering owl, as requested, and all he could
do now was wait: Either Dumbledore was going to
come, or he was not. But Harry had not packed. It just seemed too good to
be true that he was going to be rescued from the
Dursleys after a mere fortnight of their company. He
could not shrug off the feeling that something was
going to go wrong — his reply to Dumbledore ’s letter
might have gone astray; Dumbledore could be
prevented from collecting him; the letter might turn
out not to be from Dumbledore at all, but a trick or
joke or trap. Harry had not been able to face packing
and then being let down and having to unpack again.
The only gesture he had made to the possibility of a
journey was to shut his snowy owl, Hedwig, safely in
her cage.
The minute hand on the alarm clock reached the
number twelve and, at that precise moment, the
streetlamp outside the window went out. Harry awoke as though the sudden darkness were an
alarm. Hastily straightening his glasses and
unsticking his cheek from the glass, he pressed his
nose against the window instead and squinted down
at the pavement. A tall figure in a long, billowing
cloak was walking up the garden path. Harry jumped up as though he had received an
electric shock, knocked over his chair, and started
snatching anything and everything within reach from
the floor and throwing it into the trunk. Even as he
lobbed a set of robes, two spellbooks, and a packet of
crisps across the room, the doorbell rang. Downstairs
in the living room his Uncle Vernon shouted, “Who
the blazes is calling at this time of night?” Harry froze with a brass telescope in one hand and a
pair of trainers in the other. He had completely
forgotten to warn the Dursleys that Dumbledore
might be coming. Feeling both panicky and close to
laughter, he clambered over the trunk and wrenched
open his bedroom door in time to hear a deep voice
say, “Good evening. You must be Mr. Dursley. I
daresay Harry has told you I would be coming for
him?” Harry ran down the stairs two at a time, coming to an
abrupt halt several steps from the bottom, as long
experience had taught him to remain out of arm’s
reach of his uncle whenever possible. There in the
doorway stood a tall, thin man with waist-length
silver hair and beard. Half-moon spectacles were
perched on his crooked nose, and he was wearing a
long black traveling cloak and a pointed hat. Vernon
Dursley, whose mustache was quite as bushy as
Dumbledore ’s, though black, and who was wearing a
puce dressing gown, was staring at the visitor as
though he could not believe his tiny eyes. “Judging by your look of stunned disbelief, Harry did
not warn you that I was coming,” said Dumbledore
pleasantly. “However, let us assume that you have
invited me warmly into your house. It is unwise to
linger overlong on doorsteps in these troubled times.” He stepped smartly over the threshold and closed the
front door behind him. “It is a long time since my last visit,” said
Dumbledore, peering down his crooked nose at Uncle
Vernon. “I must say, your agapanthus are
flourishing.” Vernon Dursley said nothing at all. Harry did not
doubt that speech would return to him, and soon —
the vein pulsing in his uncle’s temple was reaching
danger point — but something about Dumbledore
seemed to have robbed him temporarily of breath. It
might have been the blatant wizardishness of his
appearance, but it might, too, have been that even
Uncle Vernon could sense that here was a man whom
it would be very difficult to bully. “Ah, good evening Harry,” said Dumbledore, looking
up at him through his half-moon glasses with a most
satisfied expression. “Excellent, excellent.” These words seemed to rouse Uncle Vernon. It was
clear that as far as he was concerned, any man who
could look at Harry and say “excellent” was a man
with whom he could never see eye to eye. “I don’t mean to be rude — ” he began, in a tone that
threatened rudeness in every syllable.  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“ — yet, sadly, accidental rudeness occurs alarmingly
often,” Dumbledore finished the sentence gravely.
“Best to say nothing at all, my dear man. Ah, and this
must be Petunia.” The kitchen door had opened, and there stood Harry’s
aunt, wearing rubber gloves and a housecoat over her
nightdress, clearly halfway through her usual pre-
bedtime wipe-down of all the kitchen surfaces. Her
rather horsey face registered nothing but shock. “Albus Dumbledore,” said Dumbledore, when Uncle
Vernon failed to effect an introduction. “We have
corresponded, of course.” Harry thought this an odd
way of reminding Aunt Petunia that he had once sent
her an exploding letter, but Aunt Petunia did not
challenge the term. “And this must be your son,
Dudley?” Dudley had that moment peered round the living
room door. His large, blond head rising out of the
stripy collar of his pajamas looked oddly disembodied,
his mouth gaping in astonishment and fear.
Dumbledore waited a moment or two, apparently to
see whether any of the Dursleys were going to say
anything, but as the silence stretched on he smiled. “Shall we assume that you have invited me into your
sitting room? Dudley scrambled out of the way as Dumbledore
passed him. Harry, still clutching the telescope and
trainers, jumped the last few stairs and followed
Dumbledore, who had settled himself in the armchair
nearest the fire and was taking in the surroundings
with an expression of benign interest. He looked quite
extraordinarily out of place.
“Aren’t — aren’t we leaving, sir?” Harry asked
anxiously. “Yes, indeed we are, but there are a few matters we
need to discuss first,” said Dumbledore. “And I would
prefer not to do so in the open. We shall trespass
upon your aunt and uncle’s hospitality only a little
longer.” “You will, will you?” Vernon Dursley had entered the room, Petunia at his
shoulder, and Dudley skulking behind them both. “Yes,” said Dumbledore simply, “I shall.” He drew his wand so rapidly that Harry barely saw it;
with a casual flick, the sofa zoomed forward and
knocked the knees out from under all three of the
Dursley s so that they collapsed upon it in a heap.
Another flick of the wand and the sofa zoomed back
to its original position. “We may as well be comfortable,” said Dumbledore
pleasantly. As he replaced his wand in his pocket, Harry saw that
his hand was blackened and shriveled; it looked as
though his flesh had been burned away. “Sir — what happened to your — ?” “Later, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Please sit down.” Harry took the remaining armchair, choosing not to
look at the Dursleys, who seemed stunned into
silence.
“I would assume that you were going to offer me
refreshment,” Dumbledore said to Uncle Vernon, “but
the evidence so far suggests that that would be
optimistic to the point of foolishness.” A third twitch of the wand, and a dusty bottle and five
glasses appeared in midair. The bottle tipped and
poured a generous measure of honey-colored liquid
into each of the glasses, which then floated to each
person in the room. “Madam Rosmerta’s finest oak-matured mead,” said
Dumbledore, raising his glass to Harry, who caught
hold of his own and sipped. He had never tasted
anything like it before, but enjoyed it immensely. The
Dursleys, after quick, scared looks at one another,
tried to ignore their glasses completely, a difficult feat,
as they were nudging them gently on the sides of their
heads. Harry could not suppress a suspicion that
Dumbledore was rather enjoying himself. “Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, turning toward him,
“a difficulty has arisen which I hope you will be able
to solve for us. By us, I mean the Order of the
Phoenix. But first of all I must tell you that Sirius’s
will was discovered a week ago and that he left you
everything he owned.” Over on the sofa, Uncle Vernon’s head turned, but
Harry did not look at him, nor could he think of
anything to say except, “Oh. Right.” “This is, in the main, fairly straightforward,”
Dumbledore went on. “You add a reasonable amount
of gold to your account at Gringotts, and you inherit
all of Sirius’s personal possessions. The slightly
problematic part of the legacy — ”
“His godfather’s dead?” said Uncle Vernon loudly from
the sofa. Dumbledore and Harry both turned to look
at him. The glass of mead was now knocking quite
insistently on the side of Vernon’s head; he attempted
to beat it away. “He’s dead? His godfather?” “Yes,” said Dumbledore. He did not ask Harry why he
had not confided in the Dursleys. “Our problem,” he
continued to Harry, as if there had been no
interruption, “is that Sirius also left you number
twelve, Grimmauld Place.” “He’s been left a house?” said Uncle Vernon greedily,
his small eyes narrowing, but nobody answered him. “You can keep using it as headquarters,” said Harry. “I don’t care. You can have it, I don’t really want it.”
Harry never wanted to set foot in number twelve,
Grimmauld Place again if he could help it. He thought
he would be haunted forever by the memory of Sirius
prowling its dark musty rooms alone, imprisoned
within the place he had wanted so desperately to
leave. “That is generous,” said Dumbledore. “We have,
however, vacated the building temporarily.” “Why?” “Well,” said Dumbledore, ignoring the mutterings of
Uncle Vernon, who was now being rapped smartly
over the head by the persistent glass of mead, “Black
family tradition decreed that the house was handed
down the direct line, to the next male with the name
of ‘Black. ’ Sirius was the very last of the line as his
younger brother, Regulus, predeceased him and both
were childless. While his will makes it perfectly plain
that he wants you to have the house, it is
nevertheless possible that some spell or enchantment
has been set upon the place to ensure that it cannot
be owned by anyone other than a pureblood.” A vivid image of the shrieking, spitting portrait of
Sirius’s mother that hung in the hall of number
twelve, Grimmauld Place flashed into Harry’s mind. “I
bet there has,” he said. “Quite,” said Dumbledore. “And if such an
enchantment exists, then the ownership of the house
is most likely to pass to the eldest of Sirius’s living
relatives, which would mean his cousin, Bellatrix
Lestrange.” Without realizing what he was doing, Harry sprang to
his feet; the telescope and trainers in his lap rolled
across the floor. Bellatrix Lestrange, Sirius’s killer,
inherit his house? “No,” he said. “Well, obviously we would prefer that she didn’t get it
either,” said Dumbledore calmly. “The situation is
fraught with complications. We do not know whether
the enchantments we ourselves have placed upon it,
for example, making it Unplottable, will hold now that
ownership has passed from Sirius’s hands. It might
be that Bellatrix will arrive on the doorstep at any
moment. Naturally we had to move out until such
time as we have clarified the position.” “But how are you going to find out if I’m allowed to
own it?” “Fortunately,” said Dumbledore, “there is a simple
test.” He placed his empty glass on a small table beside his
chair, but before he could do anything else, Uncle
Vernon shouted, “ Will you get these ruddy things off
us?” Harry looked around; all three of the Dursleys were
cowering with their arms over their heads as their
glasses bounced up and down on their skulls, their
contents flying everywhere. “Oh, I’m so sorry,” said Dumbledore politely, and he
raised his wand again. All three glasses vanished. “But it would have been better manners to drink it,
you know.” It looked as though Uncle Vernon was bursting with
any number of unpleasant retorts, but he merely
shrank back into the cushions with Aunt Petunia and
Dudley and said nothing, keeping his small piggy eyes
on Dumbledore ’s wand. “You see,” Dumbledore said, turning back to Harry
and again speaking as though Uncle Vernon had not
uttered, “if you have indeed inherited the house, you
have also inherited — ” He flicked his wand for a fifth time. There was a loud
crack, and a house-elf appeared, with a snout for a
nose, giant bat’s ears, and enormous bloodshot eyes,
crouching on the Dursleys’ shag carpet and covered
in grimy rags. Aunt Petunia let out a hair-raising
shriek; nothing this filthy had entered her house in
living memory. Dudley drew his large, bare, pink feet
off the floor and sat with them raised almost above
his head, as though he thought the creature might
run up his pajama trousers, and Uncle Vernon
bellowed, “What the hell is that?” “Kreacher,” finished Dumbledore.
“Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t!”
croaked the house-elf, quite as loudly as Uncle
Vernon, stamping his long, gnarled feet and pulling
his ears. “Kreacher belongs to Miss Bellatrix, oh yes,
Kreacher belongs to the Blacks, Kreacher wants his
new mistress, Kreacher won’t go to the Potter brat,
Kreacher won’t, won’t, won’t — ” “As you can see, Harry,” said Dumbledore loudly, over
Kreacher’s continued croaks of “won’t, won’t, won’t,”
“Kreacher is showing a certain reluctance to pass into
your ownership.” “I don’t care,” said Harry again, looking with disgust
at the writhing, stamping house-elf. “I don’t want
him.” “Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t — ” “You would prefer him to pass into the ownership of
Bellatrix Lestrange? Bearing in mind that he has lived
at the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix for
the past year?” “Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t — ” Harry stared at Dumbledore. He knew that Kreacher
could not be permitted to go and live with Bellatrix
Lestrange, but the idea of owning him, of having
responsibility for the creature that had betrayed
Sirius, was repugnant. “Give him an order,” said Dumbledore. “If he has
passed into your ownership, he will have to obey. If
not, then we shall have to think of some other means
of keeping him from his rightful mistress.” “Won’t, won’t, won’t, WON’T.”
Kreacher’s voice had risen to a scream. Harry could
think of nothing to say, except, “Kreacher, shut up!” It looked for a moment as though Kreacher was going
to choke. He grabbed his throat, his mouth still
working furiously, his eyes bulging. After a few
seconds of frantic gulping, he threw himself face
forward onto the carpet (Aunt Petunia whimpered)
and beat the floor with his hands and feet, giving
himself over to a violent, but entirely silent, tantrum. “Well, that simplifies matters,” said Dumbledore
cheerfully. “It seems that Sirius knew what he was
doing. You are the rightful owner of number twelve,
Grimmauld Place and of Kreacher.” “Do I — do I have to keep him with me?” Harry asked,
aghast, as Kreacher thrashed around at his feet. “Not if you don’t want to,” said Dumbledore. “If I
might make a suggestion, you could send him to
Hogwarts to work in the kitchen there. In that way,
the other house-elves could keep an eye on him.” “Yeah,” said Harry in relief, “yeah, I’ll do that. Er —
Kreacher — I want you to go to Hogwarts and work in
the kitchens there with the other house-elves.” Kreacher, who was now lying flat on his back with his
arms and legs in the air, gave Harry one upside-down
look of deepest loathing and, with another loud crack,
vanished. “Good,” said Dumbledore. “There is also the matter of
the hippogriff, Buckbeak. Hagrid has been looking
after him since Sirius died, but Buckbeak is yours
now, so if you would prefer to make different
arrangements — ”
“No,” said Harry at once, “he can stay with Hagrid. I
think Buckbeak would prefer that.” “Hagrid will be delighted,” said Dumbledore, smiling.
“He was thrilled to see Buckbeak again. Incidentally,
we have decided, in the interests of Buckbeak’s
safety, to rechristen him ‘Witherwings’ for the time
being, though I doubt that the Ministry would ever
guess he is the hippogriff they once sentenced to
death. Now, Harry, is your trunk packed?” “Erm ...” “Doubtful that I would turn up?” Dumbledore
suggested shrewdly. “I’ll just go and — er — finish off,” said Harry hastily,
hurrying to pick up his fallen telescope and trainers. It took him a little over ten minutes to track down
everything he needed; at last he had managed to
extract his Invisibility Cloak from under the bed,
screwed the top back on his jar of color-change ink,
and forced the lid of his trunk shut on his cauldron.
Then, heaving his trunk in one hand and holding
Hedwig’s cage in the other, he made his way back
downstairs. He was disappointed to discover that Dumbledore was
not waiting in the hall, which meant that he had to
return to the living room. Nobody was talking. Dumbledore was humming
quietly, apparently quite at his ease, but the
atmosphere was thicker than cold custard, and Harry
did not dare look at the Dursleys as he said, “Professor — I’m ready now.”
“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Just one last thing, then.”
And he turned to speak to the Dursleys once more. “As you will no doubt be aware, Harry comes of age in
a year’s time — ” “No,” said Aunt Petunia, speaking for the first time
since Dumbledore’s arrival. “I’m sorry?” said Dumbledore politely. “No, he doesn’t. He’s a month younger than Dudley,
and Dudders doesn’t turn eighteen until the year after
next.” “Ah,” said Dumbledore pleasantly, “but in the
Wizarding world, we come of age at seventeen.” Uncle Vernon muttered, “Preposterous,” but
Dumbledore ignored him. “Now, as you already know, the wizard called Lord
Voldemort has returned to this country. The
Wizarding community is currently in a state of open
warfare. Harry, whom Lord Voldemort has already
attempted to kill on a number of occasions, is in even
greater danger now than the day when I left him upon
your doorstep fifteen years ago, with a letter
explaining about his parents’ murder and expressing
the hope that you would care for him as though he
were your own.” Dumbledore paused, and although his voice remained
light and calm, and he gave no obvious sign of anger,
Harry felt a kind of chill emanating from him and
noticed that the Dursleys drew very slightly closer
together.
“You did not do as I asked. You have never treated
Harry as a son. He has known nothing but neglect
and often cruelty at your hands. The best that can be
said is that he has at least escaped the appalling
damage you have inflicted upon the unfortunate boy
sitting between you.” Both Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked around
instinctively, as though expecting to see someone
other than Dudley squeezed between them. “Us — mistreat Dudders? What d’you — ?” began
Uncle Vernon furiously, but Dumbledore raised his
finger for silence, a silence which fell as though he
had struck Uncle Vernon dumb. “The magic I evoked fifteen years ago means that
Harry has powerful protection while he can still call
this house ‘home.’ However miserable he has been
here, however unwelcome, however badly treated, you
have at least, grudgingly, allowed him houseroom.
This magic will cease to operate the moment that
Harry turns seventeen; in other words, at the moment
he becomes a man. I ask only this: that you allow
Harry to return, once more, to this house, before his
seventeenth birthday, which will ensure that the
protection continues until that time.” None of the Dursleys said anything. Dudley was
frowning slightly, as though he was still trying to
work out when he had ever been mistreated. Uncle
Vernon looked as though he had something stuck in
his throat; Aunt Petunia, however, was oddly flushed. “Well, Harry ... time for us to be off,” said Dumbledore
at last, standing up and straightening his long black
cloak. “Until we meet again,” he said to the Dursleys,
who looked as though that moment could wait forever
as far as they were concerned, and after doffing his
hat, he swept from the room. “Bye,” said Harry hastily to the Dursleys, and followed
Dumbledore, who paused beside Harry’s trunk, upon
which Hedwig’s cage was perched. “We do not want to be encumbered by these just
now,” he said, pulling out his wand again. “I shall
send them to the Burrow to await us there. However, I
would like you to bring your Invisibility Cloak ... just
in case.” Harry extracted his cloak from his trunk with some
difficulty, trying not to show Dumbledore the mess
within. When he had stuffed it into an inside pocket
of his jacket, Dumbledore waved his wand and the
trunk, cage, and Hedwig vanished. Dumbledore then
waved his wand again, and the front door opened
onto cool, misty darkness. “And now, Harry, let us step out into the night and
pursue that flighty temptress, adventure.”  HORACE SLUGHORN Despite the fact that he had spent every waking
moment of the past few days hoping desperately that
Dumbledore would indeed come to fetch him, Harry
felt distinctly awkward as they set off down Privet
Drive together. He had never had a proper
conversation with the headmaster outside of
Hogwarts before; there was usually a desk between
them. The memory of their last face-to-face encounter
kept intruding too, and it rather heightened Harry’s
sense of embarrassment; he had shouted a lot on that
occasion, not to mention done his best to smash
several of Dumbledore ’s most prized possessions. Dumbledore, however, seemed completely relaxed. “Keep your wand at the ready, Harry,” he said
brightly. “But I thought I’m not allowed to use magic outside
school, sir?”  “If there is an attack,” said Dumbledore, “I give you
permission to use any counterjinx or curse that might
occur to you. However, I do not think you need worry
about being attacked tonight.” “Why not, sir?” “You are with me,” said Dumbledore simply. “This will
do, Harry.” He came to an abrupt halt at the end of Privet Drive. “You have not, of course, passed your Apparition
Test,” he said. “No,” said Harry. “I thought you had to be seventeen?” “You do,” said Dumbledore. “So you will need to hold
on to my arm very tightly. My left, if you don’t mind —
as you have noticed, my wand arm is a little fragile at
the moment.” Harry gripped Dumbledore’s proffered forearm. “Very good,” said Dumbledore. “Well, here we go.” Harry felt Dumbledore’s arm twist away from him and
redoubled his grip; the next thing he knew, everything
went black; he was being pressed very hard from all
directions; he could not breathe, there were iron
bands tightening around his chest; his eyeballs were
being forced back into his head; his eardrums were
being pushed deeper into his skull and then — He gulped great lungfuls of cold night air and opened
his streaming eyes. He felt as though he had just
been forced through a very tight rubber tube. It was a
few seconds before he realized that Privet Drive had
vanished. He and Dumbledore were now standing in
what appeared to be a deserted village square, in the
center of which stood an old war memorial and a few
benches. His comprehension catching up with his
senses, Harry realized that he had just Apparated for
the first time in his life. “Are you all right?” asked Dumbledore, looking down
at him solicitously. “The sensation does take some
getting used to.” “I’m fine,” said Harry, rubbing his ears, which felt as
though they had left Privet Drive rather reluctantly.
“But I think I might prefer brooms. ...” Dumbledore smiled, drew his traveling cloak a little
more tightly around his neck, and said, “This way.” He set off at a brisk pace, past an empty inn and a
few houses. According to a clock on a nearby church,
it was almost midnight. “So tell me, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Your scar ...
has it been hurting at all?” Harry raised a hand unconsciously to his forehead
and rubbed the lightning-shaped mark. “No,” he said, “and IVe been wondering about that. I
thought it would be burning all the time now
Voldemort’s getting so powerful again.” He glanced up at Dumbledore and saw that he was
wearing a satisfied expression. “I, on the other hand, thought otherwise,” said
Dumbledore. “Lord Voldemort has finally realized the
dangerous access to his thoughts and feelings you
have been enjoying. It appears that he is now
employing Occlumency against you.”
“Well, I’m not complaining,” said Harry, who missed
neither the disturbing dreams nor the startling
flashes of insight into Voldemort’s mind. They turned a corner, passing a telephone box and a
bus shelter. Harry looked sideways at Dumbledore
again. “Professor?” “Harry?” “Er — where exactly are we?” “This, Harry, is the charming village of Budleigh
Babberton.” “And what are we doing here?” “Ah yes, of course, I haven’t told you,” said
Dumbledore. “Well, I have lost count of the number of
times I have said this in recent years, but we are,
once again, one member of staff short. We are here to
persuade an old colleague of mine to come out of
retirement and return to Hogwarts.” “How can I help with that, sir?” “Oh, I think we’ll find a use for you,” said Dumbledore
vaguely. “Left here, Harry.” They proceeded up a steep, narrow street lined with
houses. All the windows were dark. The odd chill that
had lain over Privet Drive for two weeks persisted here
too. Thinking of dementors, Harry cast a look over his
shoulder and grasped his wand reassuringly in his
pocket. “Professor, why couldn’t we just Apparate directly into
your old colleague’s house?”
“Because it would be quite as rude as kicking down
the front door,” said Dumbledore. “Courtesy dictates
that we offer fellow wizards the opportunity of denying
us entry. In any case, most Wizarding dwellings are
magically protected from unwanted Apparators. At
Hogwarts, for instance — ” “ — you can’t Apparate anywhere inside the buildings
or grounds,” said Harry quickly. “Hermione Granger
told me.” “And she is quite right. We turn left again.” The church clock chimed midnight behind them. Harry wondered why Dumbledore did not consider it
rude to call on his old colleague so late, but now that
conversation had been established, he had more
pressing questions to ask. “Sir, I saw in the Daily Prophet that Fudge has been
sacked. ...” “Correct,” said Dumbledore, now turning up a steep
side street. “He has been replaced, as I am sure you
also saw, by Rufus Scrimgeour, who used to be Head
of the Auror office.” “Is he ... Do you think he’s good?” asked Harry. “An interesting question,” said Dumbledore. “He is
able, certainly. A more decisive and forceful
personality than Cornelius.” “Yes, but I meant — ” “I know what you meant. Rufus is a man of action
and, having fought Dark wizards for most of his
working life, does not underestimate Lord Voldemort.”
Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not say anything
about the disagreement with Scrimgeour that the
Daily Prophet had reported, and he did not have the
nerve to pursue the subject, so he changed it. “And ...
sir ... I saw about Madam Bones.” “Yes,” said Dumbledore quietly. “A terrible loss. She
was a great witch. Just up here, I think — ouch.” He had pointed with his injured hand. “Professor, what happened to your — ?” “I have no time to explain now,” said Dumbledore. “It
is a thrilling tale, I wish to do it justice.” He smiled at Harry, who understood that he was not
being snubbed, and that he had permission to keep
asking questions. “Sir — I got a Ministry of Magic leaflet by owl, about
security measures we should all take against the
Death Eaters. ...” “Yes, I received one myself,” said Dumbledore, still
smiling. “Did you find it useful?” “Not really.” “No, I thought not. You have not asked me, for
instance, what is my favorite flavor of jam, to check
that I am indeed Professor Dumbledore and not an
impostor.” “I didn’t ...” Harry began, not entirely sure whether he
was being reprimanded or not. “For future reference, Harry, it is raspberry ...
although of course, if I were a Death Eater, I would
have been sure to research my own jam preferences
before impersonating myself.” “Er ... right,” said Harry. “Well, on that leaflet, it said
something about Inferi. What exactly are they? The
leaflet wasn’t very clear.” “They are corpses,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Dead
bodies that have been bewitched to do a Dark
wizard’s bidding. Inferi have not been seen for a long
time, however, not since Voldemort was last powerful. . . . He killed enough people to make an army of them,
of course. This is the place, Harry, just here. ...” They were nearing a small, neat stone house set in its
own garden. Harry was too busy digesting the horrible
idea of Inferi to have much attention left for anything
else, but as they reached the front gate, Dumbledore
stopped dead and Harry walked into him. “Oh dear. Oh dear, dear, dear.” Harry followed his gaze up the carefully tended front
path and felt his heart sink. The front door was
hanging off its hinges. Dumbledore glanced up and down the street. It
seemed quite deserted. “Wand out and follow me, Harry,” he said quietly. He opened the gate and walked swiftly and silently up
the garden path, Harry at his heels, then pushed the
front door very slowly, his wand raised and at the
ready. “Lumos.”
Dumbledore ’s wand tip ignited, casting its light up a
narrow hallway. To the left, another door stood open.
Holding his illuminated wand aloft, Dumbledore
walked into the sitting room with Harry right behind
him. A scene of total devastation met their eyes. A
grandfather clock lay splintered at their feet, its face
cracked, its pendulum lying a little farther away like a
dropped sword. A piano was on its side, its keys
strewn across the floor. The wreckage of a fallen
chandelier glittered nearby. Cushions lay deflated,
feathers oozing from slashes in their sides; fragments
of glass and china lay like powder over everything.
Dumbledore raised his wand even higher, so that its
light was thrown upon the walls, where something
darkly red and glutinous was spattered over the
wallpaper. Harry’s small intake of breath made
Dumbledore look around. “Not pretty, is it?” he said heavily. “Yes, something
horrible has happened here.” Dumbledore moved carefully into the middle of the
room, scrutinizing the wreckage at his feet. Harry
followed, gazing around, half-scared of what he might
see hidden behind the wreck of the piano or the
overturned sofa, but there was no sign of a body. “Maybe there was a fight and — and they dragged him
off, Professor?” Harry suggested, trying not to imagine
how badly wounded a man would have to be to leave
those stains spattered halfway up the walls. “I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore quietly, peering
behind an overstuffed armchair lying on its side. “You mean he’s — ?”
“Still here somewhere? Yes.” And without warning, Dumbledore swooped, plunging
the tip of his wand into the seat of the overstuffed
armchair, which yelled, “Ouch!” “Good evening, Horace,” said Dumbledore,
straightening up again. Harry’s jaw dropped. Where a split second before
there had been an armchair, there now crouched an
enormously fat, bald, old man who was massaging his
lower belly and squinting up at Dumbledore with an
aggrieved and watery eye. “There was no need to stick the wand in that hard,”
he said gruffly, clambering to his feet. “It hurt.” The wandlight sparkled on his shiny pate, his
prominent eyes, his enormous, silver, walruslike
mustache, and the highly polished buttons on the
maroon velvet jacket he was wearing over a pair of
lilac silk pajamas. The top of his head barely reached
Dumbledore ’s chin. “What gave it away?” he grunted as he staggered to
his feet, still rubbing his lower belly. He seemed
remarkably unabashed for a man who had just been
discovered pretending to be an armchair. “My dear Horace,” said Dumbledore, looking amused,
“if the Death Eaters really had come to call, the Dark
Mark would have been set over the house.” The wizard clapped a pudgy hand to his vast
forehead. “The Dark Mark,” he muttered. “Knew there was
something ... ah well. Wouldn’t have had time  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
anyway, I’d only just put the finishing touches to my
upholstery when you entered the room.” He heaved a great sigh that made the ends of his
mustache flutter. “Would you like my assistance clearing up?” asked
Dumbledore politely. “Please,” said the other. They stood back to back, the tall thin wizard and the
short round one, and waved their wands in one
identical sweeping motion. The furniture flew back to its original places;
ornaments reformed in midair, feathers zoomed into
their cushions; torn books repaired themselves as
they landed upon their shelves; oil lanterns soared
onto side tables and reignited; a vast collection of
splintered silver picture frames flew glittering across
the room and alighted, whole and untarnished, upon
a desk; rips, cracks, and holes healed everywhere,
and the walls wiped themselves clean. “What kind of blood was that, incidentally?” asked
Dumbledore loudly over the chiming of the newly
unsmashed grandfather clock. “On the walls? Dragon,” shouted the wizard called
Horace, as, with a deafening grinding and tinkling,
the chandelier screwed itself back into the ceiling. There was a final plunk from the piano, and silence. “Yes, dragon,” repeated the wizard conversationally.
“My last bottle, and prices are sky-high at the
moment. Still, it might be reusable.”
He stumped over to a small crystal bottle standing on
top of a sideboard and held it up to the light,
examining the thick liquid within. “Hmm. Bit dusty.” He set the bottle back on the sideboard and sighed. It
was then that his gaze fell upon Harry. “Oho,” he said, his large round eyes flying to Harry’s
forehead and the lightning-shaped scar it bore. “Ohol” “This,” said Dumbledore, moving forward to make the
introduction, “is Harry Potter. Harry, this is an old
friend and colleague of mine, Horace Slughorn.” Slughorn turned on Dumbledore, his expression
shrewd. “So that’s how you thought you’d persuade
me, is it? Well, the answer’s no, Albus.” He pushed past Harry, his face turned resolutely
away with the air of a man trying to resist temptation. “I suppose we can have a drink, at least?” asked
Dumbledore. “For old time’s sake?” Slughorn hesitated. “All right then, one drink,” he said ungraciously. Dumbledore smiled at Harry and directed him toward
a chair not unlike the one that Slughorn had so
recently impersonated, which stood right beside the
newly burning fire and a brightly glowing oil lamp.
Harry took the seat with the distinct impression that
Dumbledore, for some reason, wanted to keep him as
visible as possible. Certainly when Slughorn, who had
been busy with decanters and glasses, turned to face
the room again, his eyes fell immediately upon Harry.
“Hmpf,” he said, looking away quickly as though
frightened of hurting his eyes. “Here — ” He gave a
drink to Dumbledore, who had sat down without
invitation, thrust the tray at Harry, and then sank
into the cushions of the repaired sofa and a
disgruntled silence. His legs were so short they did
not touch the floor. “Well, how have you been keeping, Horace?”
Dumbledore asked. “Not so well,” said Slughorn at once. “Weak chest.
Wheezy. Rheumatism too. Can’t move like I used to.
Well, that’s to be expected. Old age. Fatigue.” “And yet you must have moved fairly quickly to
prepare such a welcome for us at such short notice,”
said Dumbledore. “You can’t have had more than
three minutes’ warning?” Slughorn said, half irritably, half proudly, “Two. Didn’t hear my Intruder Charm go off, I was taking a
bath. Still,” he added sternly, seeming to pull himself
back together again, “the fact remains that I’m an old
man, Albus. A tired old man who’s earned the right to
a quiet life and a few creature comforts.” He certainly had those, thought Harry, looking
around the room. It was stuffy and cluttered, yet
nobody could say it was uncomfortable; there were
soft chairs and footstools, drinks and books, boxes of
chocolates and plump cushions. If Harry had not
known who lived there, he would have guessed at a
rich, fussy old lady. “You’re not yet as old as I am, Horace,” said
Dumbledore.
“Well, maybe you ought to think about retirement
yourself,” said Slughorn bluntly. His pale gooseberry
eyes had found Dumbledore ’s injured hand. “Reactions not what they were, I see.” “You’re quite right,” said Dumbledore serenely,
shaking back his sleeve to reveal the tips of those
burned and blackened fingers; the sight of them made
the back of Harry’s neck prickle unpleasantly. “I am
undoubtedly slower than I was. But on the other
hand ...” He shrugged and spread his hands wide, as though to
say that age had its compensations, and Harry
noticed a ring on his uninjured hand that he had
never seen Dumbledore wear before: It was large,
rather clumsily made of what looked like gold, and
was set with a heavy black stone that had cracked
down the middle. Slughorn’s eyes lingered for a
moment on the ring too, and Harry saw a tiny frown
momentarily crease his wide forehead. “So, all these precautions against intruders, Horace
... are they for the Death Eaters’ benefit, or mine?”
asked Dumbledore. “What would the Death Eaters want with a poor
broken-down old buffer like me?” demanded
Slughorn. “I imagine that they would want you to turn your
considerable talents to coercion, torture, and
murder,” said Dumbledore. “Are you really telling me
that they haven’t come recruiting yet?” Slughorn eyed Dumbledore balefully for a moment,
then muttered, “I haven’t given them the chance. I’ve
been on the move for a year. Never stay in one place
more than a week. Move from Muggle house to
Muggle house — the owners of this place are on
holiday in the Canary Islands — it’s been very
pleasant, I’ll be sorry to leave. It’s quite easy once you
know how, one simple Freezing Charm on these
absurd burglar alarms they use instead of
Sneakoscopes and make sure the neighbors don’t
spot you bringing in the piano.” “Ingenious,” said Dumbledore. “But it sounds a rather
tiring existence for a broken-down old buffer in
search of a quiet life. Now, if you were to return to
Hogwarts — ” “If you’re going to tell me my life would be more
peaceful at that pestilential school, you can save your
breath, Albus! I might have been in hiding, but some
funny rumors have reached me since Dolores
Umbridge left! If that’s how you treat teachers these
days — ” “Professor Umbridge ran afoul of our centaur herd,”
said Dumbledore. “I think you, Horace, would have
known better than to stride into the forest and call a
horde of angry centaurs ‘filthy half-breeds.’ ” “That’s what she did, did she?” said Slughorn. “Idiotic
woman. Never liked her.” Harry chuckled and both Dumbledore and Slughorn
looked round at him. “Sorry,” Harry said hastily. “It’s just — I didn’t like
her either.” Dumbledore stood up rather suddenly. “Are you leaving?” asked Slughorn at once, looking
hopeful.
“No, I was wondering whether I might use your
bathroom,” said Dumbledore. “Oh,” said Slughorn, clearly disappointed. “Second on
the left down the hall.” Dumbledore strode from the room. Once the door had
closed behind him, there was silence. After a few
moments, Slughorn got to his feet but seemed
uncertain what to do with himself. He shot a furtive
look at Harry, then crossed to the fire and turned his
back on it, warming his wide behind. “Don’t think I don’t know why he’s brought you,” he
said abruptly. Harry merely looked at Slughorn. Slughorn ’s watery
eyes slid over Harry’s scar, this time taking in the rest
of his face. “You look very like your father.” “Yeah, I’ve been told,” said Harry. “Except for your eyes. You’ve got — ” “My mother’s eyes, yeah.” Harry had heard it so often
he found it a bit wearing. “Hmpf. Yes, well. You shouldn’t have favorites as a
teacher, of course, but she was one of mine. Your
mother,” Slughorn added, in answer to Harry’s
questioning look. “Lily Evans. One of the brightest I
ever taught. Vivacious, you know. Charming girl. I
used to tell her she ought to have been in my House.
Very cheeky answers I used to get back too.” “Which was your House?”
“I was Head of Slytherin,” said Slughorn. “Oh, now,”
he went on quickly, seeing the expression on Harry’s
face and wagging a stubby finger at him, “don’t go
holding that against me! You’ll be Gryffindor like her, I suppose? Yes, it usually goes in families. Not
always, though. Ever heard of Sirius Black? You must
have done — been in the papers for the last couple of
years — died a few weeks ago — ” It was as though an invisible hand had twisted
Harry’s intestines and held them tight. “Well, anyway, he was a big pal of your father’s at
school. The whole Black family had been in my
House, but Sirius ended up in Gryffindor! Shame —
he was a talented boy. I got his brother, Regulus,
when he came along, but I’d have liked the set.” He sounded like an enthusiastic collector who had
been outbid at auction. Apparently lost in memories,
he gazed at the opposite wall, turning idly on the spot
to ensure an even heat on his backside. “Your mother was Muggle-born, of course. Couldn’t
believe it when I found out. Thought she must have
been pure-blood, she was so good.” “One of my best friends is Muggle-born,” said Harry,
“and she’s the best in our year.” “Funny how that sometimes happens, isn’t it?” said
Slughorn. “Not really,” said Harry coldly. Slughorn looked down at him in surprise. “You
mustn’t think I’m prejudiced!” he said. “No, no, no!
Haven’t I just said your mother was one of my all-time
favorite students? And there was Dirk Cresswell in
the year after her too — now Head of the Goblin
Liaison Office, of course — another Muggle-born, a
very gifted student, and still gives me excellent inside
information on the goings-on at Gringotts!” He bounced up and down a little, smiling in a self-
satisfied way, and pointed at the many glittering
photograph frames on the dresser, each peopled with
tiny moving occupants. “All ex-students, all signed. You’ll notice Barnabas
Cuffe, editor of the Daily Prophet, he’s always
interested to hear my take on the day’s news. And
Ambrosius Flume, of Honeydukes — a hamper every
birthday, and all because I was able to give him an
introduction to Ciceron Harkiss, who gave him his
first job! And at the back — you’ll see her if you just
crane your neck — that’s Gwenog Jones, who of
course captains the Holyhead Harpies. ... People are
always astonished to hear I’m on first-name terms
with the Harpies, and free tickets whenever I want
them!” This thought seemed to cheer him up enormously. “And all these people know where to find you, to send
you stuff?” asked Harry, who could not help
wondering why the Death Eaters had not yet tracked
down Slughorn if hampers of sweets, Quidditch
tickets, and visitors craving his advice and opinions
could find him. The smile slid from Slughorn ’s face as quickly as the
blood from his walls. “Of course not,” he said, looking down at Harry. “I
have been out of touch with everybody for a year.”
Harry had the impression that the words shocked
Slughorn himself; he looked quite unsettled for a
moment. Then he shrugged. “Still . . . the prudent wizard keeps his head down in
such times. All very well for Dumbledore to talk, but
taking up a post at Hogwarts just now would be
tantamount to declaring my public allegiance to the
Order of the Phoenix! And while I’m sure they’re very
admirable and brave and all the rest of it, I don’t
personally fancy the mortality rate — ” “You don’t have to join the Order to teach at
Hogwarts,” said Harry, who could not quite keep a
note of derision out of his voice: It was hard to
sympathize with Slughorn ’s cosseted existence when
he remembered Sirius, crouching in a cave and living
on rats. “Most of the teachers aren’t in it, and none of
them has ever been killed — well, unless you count
Quirrell, and he got what he deserved seeing as he
was working with Voldemort.” Harry had been sure Slughorn would be one of those
wizards who could not bear to hear Voldemort’s name
spoken aloud, and was not disappointed: Slughorn
gave a shudder and a squawk of protest, which Harry
ignored. “I reckon the staff are safer than most people while
Dumbledore ’s headmaster; he’s supposed to be the
only one Voldemort ever feared, isn’t he?” Harry went
on. Slughorn gazed into space for a moment or two: He
seemed to be thinking over Harry’s words. “Well, yes, it is true that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named
has never sought a fight with Dumbledore,” he
muttered grudgingly. “And I suppose one could argue
that as I have not joined the Death Eaters, He-Who-
Must-Not-Be-Named can hardly count me a friend ...
in which case, I might well be safer a little closer to
Albus. ... I cannot pretend that Amelia Bones’s death
did not shake me. ... If she, with all her Ministry
contacts and protection ...” Dumbledore reentered the room and Slughorn
jumped as though he had forgotten he was in the
house. “Oh, there you are, Albus,” he said. “You’ve been a
very long time. Upset stomach?” “No, I was merely reading the Muggle magazines,”
said Dumbledore. “I do love knitting patterns. Well,
Harry, we have trespassed upon Horace’s hospitality
quite long enough; I think it is time for us to leave.” Not at all reluctant to obey, Harry jumped to his feet.
Slughorn seemed taken aback. “You’re leaving?” “Yes, indeed. I think I know a lost cause when I see
one.” “Lost... ?” Slughorn seemed agitated. He twiddled his fat
thumbs and fidgeted as he watched Dumbledore
fasten his traveling cloak, and Harry zip up his jacket. “Well, I’m sorry you don’t want the job, Horace,” said
Dumbledore, raising his uninjured hand in a farewell
salute. “Hogwarts would have been glad to see you
back again. Our greatly increased security
notwithstanding, you will always be welcome to visit,
should you wish to.”  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“Yes ... well ... very gracious ... as I say ...” “Good-bye, then.” “Bye,” said Harry. They were at the front door when there was a shout
from behind them. “All right, all right,  do it!” Dumbledore turned to see Slughorn standing
breathless in the doorway to the sitting room. “You will come out of retirement?” “Yes, yes,” said Slughorn impatiently. “I must be mad,
but yes.” “Wonderful,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Then,
Horace, we shall see you on the first of September.” “Yes, I daresay you will,” grunted Slughorn. As they set off down the garden path, Slughorn ’s voice
floated after them, “ want a pay rise, Dumbledore!” Dumbledore chuckled. The garden gate swung shut
behind them, and they set off back down the hill
through the dark and the swirling mist. “Well done, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “I didn’t do anything,” said Harry in surprise. “Oh yes you did. You showed Horace exactly how
much he stands to gain by returning to Hogwarts. Did
you like him?”
“Er ...” Harry wasn’t sure whether he liked Slughorn or not.
He supposed he had been pleasant in his way, but he
had also seemed vain and, whatever he said to the
contrary, much too surprised that a Muggle-born
should make a good witch. “Horace,” said Dumbledore, relieving Harry of the
responsibility to say any of this, “likes his comfort. He
also likes the company of the famous, the successful,
and the powerful. He enjoys the feeling that he
influences these people. He has never wanted to
occupy the throne himself; he prefers the backseat —
more room to spread out, you see. He used to
handpick favorites at Hogwarts, sometimes for their
ambition or their brains, sometimes for their charm
or their talent, and he had an uncanny knack for
choosing those who would go on to become
outstanding in their various fields. Horace formed a
kind of club of his favorites with himself at the center,
making introductions, forging useful contacts
between members, and always reaping some kind of
benefit in return, whether a free box of his favorite
crystalized pineapple or the chance to recommend the
next junior member of the Goblin Liaison Office.” Harry had a sudden and vivid mental image of a great
swollen spider, spinning a web around it, twitching a
thread here and there to bring its large and juicy flies
a little closer. “I tell you all this,” Dumbledore continued, “not to
turn you against Horace — or, as we must now call
him, Professor Slughorn — but to put you on your
guard. He will undoubtedly try to collect you, Harry.
You would be the jewel of his collection; ‘the Boy Who
Lived’ ... or, as they call you these days, ‘the Chosen
One.’”
At these words, a chill that had nothing to do with the
surrounding mist stole over Harry. He was reminded
of words he had heard a few weeks ago, words that
had a horrible and particular meaning to him: Neither
can live while the other survives . . . Dumbledore had stopped walking, level with the
church they had passed earlier. “This will do, Harry. If you will grasp my arm.” Braced this time, Harry was ready for the Apparition,
but still found it unpleasant. When the pressure
disappeared and he found himself able to breathe
again, he was standing in a country lane beside
Dumbledore and looking ahead to the crooked
silhouette of his second favorite building in the world:
the Burrow. In spite of the feeling of dread that had
just swept through him, his spirits could not help but
lift at the sight of it. Ron was in there ... and so was
Mrs. Weasley, who could cook better than anyone he
knew. ... “If you don’t mind, Harry,” said Dumbledore, as they
passed through the gate, “I’d like a few words with
you before we part. In private. Perhaps in here?” Dumbledore pointed toward a run-down stone
outhouse where the Weasleys kept their broomsticks.
A little puzzled, Harry followed Dumbledore through
the creaking door into a space a little smaller than the
average cupboard. Dumbledore illuminated the tip of
his wand, so that it glowed like a torch, and smiled
down at Harry. “I hope you will forgive me for mentioning it, Harry,
but I am pleased and a little proud at how well you
seem to be coping after everything that happened at
the Ministry. Permit me to say that I think Sirius
would have been proud of you.” Harry swallowed; his voice seemed to have deserted
him. He did not think he could stand to discuss
Sirius; it had been painful enough to hear Uncle
Vernon say “His godfather’s dead?” and even worse to
hear Sirius’s name thrown out casually by Slughorn. “It was cruel,” said Dumbledore softly, “that you and
Sirius had such a short time together. A brutal
ending to what should have been a long and happy
relationship.” Harry nodded, his eyes fixed resolutely on the spider
now climbing Dumbledore’s hat. He could tell that
Dumbledore understood, that he might even suspect
that until his letter arrived, Harry had spent nearly all
his time at the Dursleys’ lying on his bed, refusing
meals, and staring at the misted window, full of the
chill emptiness that he had come to associate with
dementors. “It’s just hard,” Harry said finally, in a low voice, “to
realize he won’t write to me again.” His eyes burned suddenly and he blinked. He felt
stupid for admitting it, but the fact that he had had
someone outside Hogwarts who cared what happened
to him, almost like a parent, had been one of the best
things about discovering his godfather . . . and now the
post owls would never bring him that comfort again. “Sirius represented much to you that you had never
known before,” said Dumbledore gently. “Naturally,
the loss is devastating. ...”
“But while I was at the Dursleys’ ...” interrupted
Harry, his voice growing stronger, “I realized I can’t
shut myself away or — or crack up. Sirius wouldn’t
have wanted that, would he? And anyway, life’s too
short. ... Look at Madam Bones, look at Emmeline
Vance. ... It could be me next, couldn’t it? But if it is,”
he said fiercely, now looking straight into
Dumbledore’s blue eyes gleaming in the wandlight, “I’ll make sure I take as many Death Eaters with me
as I can, and Voldemort too if I can manage it.” “Spoken both like your mother and father’s son and
Sirius’s true godson!” said Dumbledore, with an
approving pat on Harry’s back. “I take my hat off to
you — or I would, if I were not afraid of showering you
in spiders. “And now, Harry, on a closely related subject ... I
gather that you have been taking the Daily Prophet
over the last two weeks?” “Yes,” said Harry, and his heart beat a little faster. “Then you will have seen that there have been not so
much leaks as floods concerning your adventure in
the Hall of Prophecy?” “Yes,” said Harry again. “And now everyone knows
that I’m the one — ” “No, they do not,” interrupted Dumbledore. “There are
only two people in the whole world who know the full
contents of the prophecy made about you and Lord
Voldemort, and they are both standing in this smelly,
spidery broom shed. It is true, however, that many
have guessed, correctly, that Voldemort sent his
Death Eaters to steal a prophecy, and that the
prophecy concerned you.
“Now, I think I am correct in saying that you have not
told anybody that you know what the prophecy said?” “No,” said Harry. “A wise decision, on the whole,” said Dumbledore.
“Although I think you ought to relax it in favor of your
friends, Mr. Ronald Weasley and Miss Hermione
Granger. Yes,” he continued, when Harry looked
startled, “I think they ought to know. You do them a
disservice by not confiding something this important
to them.” “I didn’t want — ” “ — to worry or frighten them?” said Dumbledore,
surveying Harry over the top of his half-moon
spectacles. “Or perhaps, to confess that you yourself
are worried and frightened? You need your friends,
Harry. As you so rightly said, Sirius would not have
wanted you to shut yourself away.” Harry said nothing, but Dumbledore did not seem to
require an answer. He continued, “On a different,
though related, subject, it is my wish that you take
private lessons with me this year.” “Private — with you?” said Harry, surprised out of his
preoccupied silence. “Yes. I think it is time that I took a greater hand in
your education.” “What will you be teaching me, sir?” “Oh, a little of this, a little of that,” said Dumbledore
airily.
Harry waited hopefully, but Dumbledore did not
elaborate, so he asked something else that had been
bothering him slightly. “If I’m having lessons with you, I won’t have to do
Occlumency lessons with Snape, will I?” “Professor Snape, Harry — and no, you will not.” “Good,” said Harry in relief, “because they were a — ” He stopped, careful not to say what he really thought. “I think the word ‘fiasco’ would be a good one here,”
said Dumbledore, nodding. Harry laughed. “Well, that means I won’t see much of Professor
Snape from now on,” he said, “because he won’t let
me carry on Potions unless I get ‘Outstanding’ in my
O.W.L., which I know I haven’t.” “Don’t count your owls before they are delivered,” said
Dumbledore gravely. “Which, now I think of it, ought
to be some time later today. Now, two more things,
Harry, before we part. “Firstly, I wish you to keep your Invisibility Cloak with
you at all times from this moment onward. Even
within Hogwarts itself. Just in case, you understand
me?” Harry nodded. “And lastly, while you stay here, the Burrow has been
given the highest security the Ministry of Magic can
provide. These measures have caused a certain
amount of inconvenience to Arthur and Molly — all
their post, for instance, is being searched at the
Ministry before being sent on. They do not mind in
the slightest, for their only concern is your safety.
However, it would be poor repayment if you risked
your neck while staying with them.” “I understand,” said Harry quickly. “Very well, then,” said Dumbledore, pushing open the
broom shed door and stepping out into the yard. “I
see a light in the kitchen. Let us not deprive Molly
any longer of the chance to deplore how thin you are.”
AN EXCESS OF PHLEGM Harry and Dumbledore approached the back door of
the Burrow, which was surrounded by the familiar
litter of old Wellington boots and rusty cauldrons;
Harry could hear the soft clucking of sleepy chickens
coming from a distant shed. Dumbledore knocked
three times and Harry saw sudden movement behind
the kitchen window. “Who’s there?” said a nervous voice he recognized as
Mrs. Weasley’s. “Declare yourself!” “It is I, Dumbledore, bringing Harry.” The door opened at once. There stood Mrs. Weasley,
short, plump, and wearing an old green dressing
gown. “Harry, dear! Gracious, Albus, you gave me a fright,
you said not to expect you before morning!” “We were lucky,” said Dumbledore, ushering Harry
over the threshold. “Slughorn proved much more  persuadable than I had expected. Harry’s doing, of
course. Ah, hello, Nymphadora!” Harry looked around and saw that Mrs. Weasley was
not alone, despite the lateness of the hour. A young
witch with a pale, heart-shaped face and mousy
brown hair was sitting at the table clutching a large
mug between her hands. “Hello, Professor,” she said. “Wotcher, Harry.” “Hi, Tonks.” Harry thought she looked drawn, even ill, and there
was something forced in her smile. Certainly her
appearance was less colorful than usual without her
customary shade of bubble-gum-pink hair. “I’d better be off,” she said quickly, standing up and
pulling her cloak around her shoulders. “Thanks for
the tea and sympathy, Molly.” “Please don’t leave on my account,” said Dumbledore
courteously, “I cannot stay, I have urgent matters to
discuss with Rufus Scrimgeour.” “No, no, I need to get going,” said Tonks, not meeting
Dumbledore’s eyes. “ ’Night — ” “Dear, why not come to dinner at the weekend, Remus and Mad-Eye are coming — ?” “No, really, Molly ... thanks anyway ... Good night,
everyone.” Tonks hurried past Dumbledore and Harry into the
yard; a few paces beyond the doorstep, she turned on
the spot and vanished into thin air. Harry noticed
that Mrs. Weasley looked troubled.  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“Well, I shall see you at Hogwarts, Harry,” said
Dumbledore. “Take care of yourself. Molly, your
servant.” He made Mrs. Weasley a bow and followed Tonks,
vanishing at precisely the same spot. Mrs. Weasley
closed the door on the empty yard and then steered
Harry by the shoulders into the full glow of the
lantern on the table to examine his appearance. “You’re like Ron,” she sighed, looking him up and
down. “Both of you look as though you’ve had
Stretching Jinxes put on you. I swear Ron’s grown
four inches since I last bought him school robes. Are
you hungry, Harry?” “Yeah, I am,” said Harry, suddenly realizing just how
hungry he was. “Sit down, dear, I’ll knock something up.” As Harry sat down, a furry ginger cat with a squashed
face jumped onto his knees and settled there,
purring. “So Hermione’s here?” he asked happily as he tickled
Crookshanks behind the ears. “Oh yes, she arrived the day before yesterday,” said
Mrs. Weasley, rapping a large iron pot with her wand.
It bounced onto the stove with a loud clang and began
to bubble at once. “Everyone’s in bed, of course, we
didn’t expect you for hours. Here you are — ” She tapped the pot again; it rose into the air, flew
toward Harry, and tipped over; Mrs. Weasley slid a
bowl neatly beneath it just in time to catch the
stream of thick, steaming onion soup.
“Bread, dear?” “Thanks, Mrs. Weasley.” She waved her wand over her shoulder; a loaf of
bread and a knife soared gracefully onto the table; as
the loaf sliced itself and the soup pot dropped back
onto the stove, Mrs. Weasley sat down opposite him. “So you persuaded Horace Slughorn to take the job?” Harry nodded, his mouth so full of hot soup that he
could not speak. “He taught Arthur and me,” said Mrs. Weasley. “He
was at Hogwarts for ages, started around the same
time as Dumbledore, I think. Did you like him?” His mouth now full of bread, Harry shrugged and
gave a noncommittal jerk of the head. “I know what you mean,” said Mrs. Weasley, nodding
wisely. “Of course he can be charming when he wants
to be, but Arthur’s never liked him much. The
Ministry’s littered with Slughorn’s old favorites, he
was always good at giving leg ups, but he never had
much time for Arthur — didn’t seem to think he was
enough of a highflier. Well, that just shows you, even
Slughorn makes mistakes. I don’t know whether
Ron’s told you in any of his letters — it’s only just
happened — but Arthur’s been promoted!” It could not have been clearer that Mrs. Weasley had
been bursting to say this. Harry swallowed a large amount of very hot soup and
thought he could feel his throat blistering. “That’s
great!” he gasped.
“You are sweet,” beamed Mrs. Weasley, possibly
taking his watering eyes for emotion at the news. “Yes, Rufus Scrimgeour has set up several new offices
in response to the present situation, and Arthur’s
heading the Office for the Detection and Confiscation
of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects.
It’s a big job, he’s got ten people reporting to him
now!” “What exactly — ?” “Well, you see, in all the panic about You-Know-Who,
odd things have been cropping up for sale
everywhere, things that are supposed to guard
against You-Know-Who and the Death Eaters. You
can imagine the kind of thing — so-called protective
potions that are really gravy with a bit of bubotuber
pus added, or instructions for defensive jinxes that
actually make your ears fall off. ... Well, in the main
the perpetrators are just people like Mundungus
Fletcher, who’ve never done an honest day’s work in
their lives and are taking advantage of how frightened
everybody is, but every now and then something
really nasty turns up. The other day Arthur
confiscated a box of cursed Sneakoscopes that were
almost certainly planted by a Death Eater. So you
see, it’s a very important job, and I tell him it’s just
silly to miss dealing with spark plugs and toasters
and all the rest of that Muggle rubbish.” Mrs. Weasley
ended her speech with a stern look, as if it had been
Harry suggesting that it was natural to miss spark
plugs. “Is Mr. Weasley still at work?” Harry asked. “Yes, he is. As a matter of fact, he’s a tiny bit late. ...
He said he’d be back around midnight. ...”
She turned to look at a large clock that was perched
awkwardly on top of a pile of sheets in the washing
basket at the end of the table. Harry recognized it at
once: It had nine hands, each inscribed with the
name of a family member, and usually hung on the
Weasleys’ sitting room wall, though its current
position suggested that Mrs. Weasley had taken to
carrying it around the house with her. Every single
one of its nine hands was now pointing at “mortal
peril.” “It’s been like that for a while now,” said Mrs. Weasley, in an unconvincingly casual voice, “ever
since You-Know-Who came back into the open. I
suppose everybody’s in mortal danger now. ... I don’t
think it can be just our family ... but I don’t know
anyone else who’s got a clock like this, so I can’t
check. Oh!” With a sudden exclamation she pointed at the clock’s
face. Mr. Weasley’s hand had switched to “traveling.” “He’s coming!” And sure enough, a moment later there was a knock
on the back door. Mrs. Weasley jumped up and
hurried to it; with one hand on the doorknob and her
face pressed against the wood she called softly,
“Arthur, is that you?” “Yes,” came Mr. Weasley’s weary voice. “But I would
say that even if I were a Death Eater, dear. Ask the
question!” “Oh, honestly ...” “Molly!” “All right, all right . . . What is your dearest ambition?”
“To find out how airplanes stay up.” Mrs. Weasley nodded and turned the doorknob, but
apparently Mr. Weasley was holding tight to it on the
other side, because the door remained firmly shut. “Molly! I’ve got to ask you your question first!” “Arthur, really, this is just silly. ...” “What do you like me to call you when we’re alone
together?” Even by the dim light of the lantern Harry could tell
that Mrs. Weasley had turned bright red; he himself
felt suddenly warm around the ears and neck, and
hastily gulped soup, clattering his spoon as loudly as
he could against the bowl. “Mollywobbles,” whispered a mortified Mrs. Weasley
into the crack at the edge of the door. “Correct,” said Mr. Weasley. “Now you can let me in.” Mrs. Weasley opened the door to reveal her husband,
a thin, balding, red-haired wizard wearing horn-
rimmed spectacles and a long and dusty traveling
cloak. “I still don’t see why we have to go through that every
time you come home,” said Mrs. Weasley, still pink in
the face as she helped her husband out of his cloak. “I mean, a Death Eater might have forced the answer
out of you before impersonating you!” “I know, dear, but it’s Ministry procedure, and I have
to set an example. Something smells good — onion
soup?”
Mr. Weasley turned hopefully in the direction of the
table. “Harry! We didn’t expect you until morning!” They shook hands, and Mr. Weasley dropped into the
chair beside Harry as Mrs. Weasley set a bowl of soup
in front of him too. “Thanks, Molly. It’s been a tough night. Some idiot’s
started selling Metamorph-Medals. Just sling them
around your neck and you’ll be able to change your
appearance at will. A hundred thousand disguises, all
for ten Galleons!” “And what really happens when you put them on?” “Mostly you just turn a fairly unpleasant orange color,
but a couple of people have also sprouted tentaclelike
warts all over their bodies. As if St. Mungo’s didn’t
have enough to do already!” “It sounds like the sort of thing Fred and George
would find funny,” said Mrs. Weasley hesitantly. “Are
you sure — ?” “Of course I am!” said Mr. Weasley. “The boys
wouldn’t do anything like that now, not when people
are desperate for protection!” “So is that why you’re late, Metamorph-Medals?” “No, we got wind of a nasty backfiring jinx down in
Elephant and Castle, but luckily the Magical Law
Enforcement Squad had sorted it out by the time we
got there. ...” Harry stifled a yawn behind his hand.
“Bed,” said an undeceived Mrs. Weasley at once. “I’ve
got Fred and George’s room all ready for you, you’ll
have it to yourself.” “Why, where are they?” “Oh, they’re in Diagon Alley, sleeping in the little flat
over their joke shop as they’re so busy,” said Mrs.
Weasley. “I must say, I didn’t approve at first, but
they do seem to have a bit of a flair for business! Come on, dear, your trunk’s already up there.” “ ’Night, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry, pushing back his
chair. Crookshanks leapt lightly from his lap and
slunk out of the room. “G’night, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley. Harry saw Mrs. Weasley glance at the clock in the
washing basket as they left the kitchen. All the hands
were once again at “mortal peril.” Fred and George’s bedroom was on the second floor.
Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at a lamp on the
bedside table and it ignited at once, bathing the room
in a pleasant golden glow. Though a large vase of
flowers had been placed on a desk in front of the
small window, their perfume could not disguise the
lingering smell of what Harry thought was
gunpowder. A considerable amount of floor space was
devoted to a vast number of unmarked, sealed
cardboard boxes, amongst which stood Harry’s school
trunk. The room looked as though it was being used
as a temporary warehouse. Hedwig hooted happily at Harry from her perch on top
of a large wardrobe, then took off through the
window; Harry knew she had been waiting to see him
before going hunting. Harry bade Mrs. Weasley good
night, put on pajamas, and got into one of the beds.
There was something hard inside the pillowcase. He
groped inside it and pulled out a sticky purple-and-
orange sweet, which he recognized as a Puking
Pastille. Smiling to himself, he rolled over and was
instantly asleep. Seconds later, or so it seemed to Harry, he was
awakened by what sounded like cannon fire as the
door burst open. Sitting bolt upright, he heard the
rasp of the curtains being pulled back: The dazzling
sunlight seemed to poke him hard in both eyes.
Shielding them with one hand, he groped hopelessly
for his glasses with the other. “Wuzzgoinon?” “We didn’t know you were here already!” said a loud
and excited voice, and he received a sharp blow to the
top of the head. “Ron, don’t hit him!” said a girl’s voice reproachfully. Harry’s hand found his glasses and he shoved them
on, though the light was so bright he could hardly see
anyway. A long, looming shadow quivered in front of
him for a moment; he blinked and Ron Weasley came
into focus, grinning down at him. “All right?” “Never been better,” said Harry, rubbing the top of his
head and slumping back onto his pillows. “You?” “Not bad,” said Ron, pulling over a cardboard box and
sitting on it. “When did you get here? Mum’s only just
told us!” “About one o’clock this morning.”  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
“Were the Muggles all right? Did they treat you okay?” “Same as usual,” said Harry, as Hermione perched
herself on the edge of his bed, “they didn’t talk to me
much, but I like it better that way. How’re you,
Hermione?” “Oh, I’m fine,” said Hermione, who was scrutinizing
Harry as though he was sickening for something. He
thought he knew what was behind this, and as he
had no wish to discuss Sirius’s death or any other
miserable subject at the moment, he said, “What’s the
time? Have I missed breakfast?” “Don’t worry about that, Mum’s bringing you up a
tray; she reckons you look underfed,” said Ron,
rolling his eyes. “So, what’s been going on?” “Nothing much, I’ve just been stuck at my aunt and
uncle’s, haven’t I?” “Come off it!” said Ron. “You’ve been off with
Dumbledore!” “It wasn’t that exciting. He just wanted me to help
him persuade this old teacher to come out of
retirement. His name’s Horace Slughorn.” “Oh,” said Ron, looking disappointed. “We thought — ” Hermione flashed a warning look at Ron, and Ron
changed tack at top speed. “ — we thought it’d be something like that.” “You did?” said Harry, amused.
“Yeah ... yeah, now Umbridge has left, obviously we
need a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher,
don’t we? So, er, what’s he like?” “He looks a bit like a walrus, and he used to be Head
of Slytherin,” said Harry. “Something wrong,
Hermione?” She was watching him as though expecting strange
symptoms to manifest themselves at any moment. She rearranged her features hastily in an
unconvincing smile. “No, of course not! So, um, did Slughorn seem like
he’ll be a good teacher?” “Dunno,” said Harry. “He can’t be worse than
Umbridge, can he?” “I know someone who’s worse than Umbridge,” said a
voice from the doorway. Ron’s younger sister slouched
into the room, looking irritable. “Hi, Harry.” “What’s up with you?” Ron asked. “It’s her,” said Ginny, plonking herself down on
Harry’s bed. “She’s driving me mad.” “What’s she done now?” asked Hermione
sympathetically. “It’s the way she talks to me — you’d think I was
about three!” “I know,” said Hermione, dropping her voice. “She’s so
full of herself.” Harry was astonished to hear Hermione talking about
Mrs. Weasley like this and could not blame Ron for
saying angrily, “Can’t you two lay off her for five
seconds?” “Oh, that’s right, defend her,” snapped Ginny. “We all
know you can’t get enough of her.” This seemed an odd comment to make about Ron’s
mother. Starting to feel that he was missing
something, Harry said, “Who are you — ?” But his question was answered before he could finish
it. The bedroom door flew open again, and Harry
instinctively yanked the bedcovers up to his chin so
hard that Hermione and Ginny slid off the bed onto
the floor. A young woman was standing in the doorway, a
woman of such breathtaking beauty that the room
seemed to have become strangely airless. She was tall
and willowy with long blonde hair and appeared to
emanate a faint, silvery glow. To complete this vision
of perfection, she was carrying a heavily laden
breakfast tray. “ ’Arry,” she said in a throaty voice. “Eet ’as been too
long!” As she swept over the threshold toward him, Mrs.
Weasley was revealed, bobbing along in her wake,
looking rather cross. “There was no need to bring up the tray, I was just
about to do it myself!” “Eet was no trouble,” said Fleur Delacour, setting the
tray across Harry’s knees and then swooping to kiss
him on each cheek: He felt the places where her
mouth had touched him burn. “I ’ave been longing to
see ’im. You remember my seester, Gabrielle? She
never stops talking about ’Ariy Potter. She will be
delighted to see you again.” “Oh ... is she here too?” Harry croaked. “No, no, silly boy,” said Fleur with a tinkling laugh, “I
mean next summer, when we — but do you not
know?” Her great blue eyes widened and she looked
reproachfully at Mrs. Weasley, who said, “We hadn’t
got around to telling him yet.” Fleur turned back to Harry, swinging her silvery sheet
of hair so that it whipped Mrs. Weasley across the
face. “Bill and I are going to be married!” “Oh,” said Harry blankly. He could not help noticing
how Mrs. Weasley, Hermione, and Ginny were all
determinedly avoiding one another’s gaze. “Wow. Er
— congratulations!” She swooped down upon him and kissed him again. “Bill is very busy at ze moment, working very ’ard,
and I only work part-time at Gringotts for my
Eenglish, so he brought me ’ere for a few days to get
to know ’is family properly. I was so pleased to ’ear
you would be coming — zere isn’t much to do ’ere,
unless you like cooking and chickens! Well — enjoy
your breakfast, ’Arry!” With these words she turned gracefully and seemed to
float out of the room, closing the door quietly behind
her. Mrs. Weasley made a noise that sounded like “tchah!”
“Mum hates her,” said Ginny quietly. “I do not hate her!” said Mrs. Weasley in a cross
whisper. “I just think they’ve hurried into this
engagement, that’s all!” “They’ve known each other a year,” said Ron, who
looked oddly groggy and was staring at the closed
door. “Well, that’s not very long! I know why it’s happened,
of course. It’s all this uncertainty with You-Know-Who
coming back, people think they might be dead
tomorrow, so they’re rushing all sorts of decisions
they’d normally take time over. It was the same last
time he was powerful, people eloping left, right, and
center — ” “Including you and Dad,” said Ginny slyly. “Yes, well, your father and I were made for each other,
what was the point in waiting?” said Mrs. Weasley.
“Whereas Bill and Fleur . . . well . . . what have they
really got in common? He’s a hardworking, down-to-
earth sort of person, whereas she’s — ” “A cow,” said Ginny, nodding. “But Bill’s not that
down-to-earth. He’s a Curse-Breaker, isn’t he, he
likes a bit of adventure, a bit of glamour. ... I expect
that’s why he’s gone for Phlegm.” “Stop calling her that, Ginny,” said Mrs. Weasley
sharply, as Harry and Hermione laughed. “Well, I’d
better get on. ... Eat your eggs while they’re warm,
Harry.” Looking careworn, she left the room. Ron still seemed
slightly punch-drunk; he was shaking his head
experimentally like a dog trying to rid its ears of
water. “Don’t you get used to her if she’s staying in the same
house?” Harry asked. “Well, you do,” said Ron, “but if she jumps out at you
unexpectedly, like then ...” “It’s pathetic,” said Hermione furiously, striding away
from Ron as far as she could go and turning to face
him with her arms folded once she had reached the
wall. “You don’t really want her around forever?” Ginny
asked Ron incredulously. When he merely shrugged,
she said, “Well, Mum’s going to put a stop to it if she
can, I bet you anything.” “How’s she going to manage that?” asked Harry. “She keeps trying to get Tonks round for dinner. I
think she’s hoping Bill will fall for Tonks instead. I
hope he does, I’d much rather have her in the family.” “Yeah, that’ll work,” said Ron sarcastically. “Listen,
no bloke in his right mind’s going to fancy Tonks
when Fleur’s around. I mean, Tonks is okay-looking
when she isn’t doing stupid things to her hair and her
nose, but — ” “She’s a damn sight nicer than Phlegm,” said Ginny “And she’s more intelligent, she’s an Auror!” said
Hermione from the corner. “Fleur’s not stupid, she was good enough to enter the
Triwizard Tournament,” said Harry.
“Not you as well!” said Hermione bitterly. “I suppose you like the way Phlegm says ‘’Arry,’ do
you?” asked Ginny scornfully. “No,” said Harry, wishing he hadn’t spoken, “I was
just saying, Phlegm — I mean, Fleur — ” “I’d much rather have Tonks in the family,” said
Ginny. “At least she’s a laugh.” “She hasn’t been much of a laugh lately,” said Ron.
“Every time I’ve seen her she’s looked more like
Moaning Myrtle.” “That’s not fair,” snapped Hermione. “She still hasn’t
got over what happened . . . you know ... I mean, he
was her cousin!” Harry’s heart sank. They had arrived at Sirius. He
picked up a fork and began shoveling scrambled eggs
into his mouth, hoping to deflect any invitation to join
in this part of the conversation. “Tonks and Sirius barely knew each other!” said Ron.
“Sirius was in Azkaban half her life and before that
their families never met — ” “That’s not the point,” said Hermione. “She thinks it
was her fault he died!” “How does she work that one out?” asked Harry, in
spite of himself. “Well, she was fighting Bellatrix Lestrange, wasn’t
she? I think she feels that if only she had finished her
off, Bellatrix couldn’t have killed Sirius.” “That’s stupid,” said Ron.
“It’s survivor’s guilt,” said Hermione. “I know Lupin’s
tried to talk her round, but she’s still really down.
She’s actually having trouble with her
Metamorphosing! ” “With her — ?” “She can’t change her appearance like she used to,”
explained Hermione. “I think her powers must have
been affected by shock, or something.” “I didn’t know that could happen,” said Harry. “Nor did I,” said Hermione, “but I suppose if you’re
really depressed ...” The door opened again and Mrs. Weasley popped her
head in. “Ginny,” she whispered, “come downstairs
and help me with the lunch.” “I’m talking to this lot!” said Ginny, outraged. “Now!” said Mrs. Weasley, and withdrew. “She only wants me there so she doesn’t have to be
alone with Phlegm!” said Ginny crossly. She swung
her long red hair around in a very good imitation of
Fleur and pranced across the room with her arms
held aloft like a ballerina. “You lot had better come down quickly too,” she said
as she left. Harry took advantage of the temporary silence to eat
more breakfast. Hermione was peering into Fred and
George’s boxes, though every now and then she cast
sideways looks at Harry. Ron, who was now helping
himself to Harry’s toast, was still gazing dreamily at
the door.
“What’s this?” Hermione asked eventually, holding up
what looked like a small telescope. “Dunno,” said Ron, “but if Fred and George’ve left it
here, it’s probably not ready for the joke shop yet, so
be careful.” “Your mum said the shop’s going well,” said Harry.
“Said Fred and George have got a real flair for
business.” “That’s an understatement,” said Ron. “They’re raking
in the Galleons! I can’t wait to see the place, we
haven’t been to Diagon Alley yet, because Mum says
Dad’s got to be there for extra security and he’s been
really busy at work, but it sounds excellent.” “And what about Percy?” asked Harry; the third-
eldest Weasley brother had fallen out with the rest of
the family. “Is he talking to your mum and dad
again?” “Nope,” said Ron. “But he knows your dad was right all along now
about Voldemort being back — ” “Dumbledore says people find it far easier to forgive
others for being wrong than being right,” said
Hermione. “I heard him telling your mum, Ron.” “Sounds like the sort of mental thing Dumbledore
would say,” said Ron. “He’s going to be giving me private lessons this year,”
said Harry conversationally. Ron choked on his bit of toast, and Hermione gasped.
“You kept that quiet!” said Ron. “I only just remembered,” said Harry honestly. “He
told me last night in your broom shed.” “Blimey ... private lessons with Dumbledore!” said
Ron, looking impressed. “I wonder why he’s ... ?” His voice tailed away. Harry saw him and Hermione
exchange looks. Harry laid down his knife and fork,
his heart beating rather fast considering that all he
was doing was sitting in bed. Dumbledore had said to
do it. ... Why not now? He fixed his eyes on his fork,
which was gleaming in the sunlight streaming into his
lap, and said, “I don’t know exactly why he’s going to
be giving me lessons, but I think it must be because
of the prophecy.” Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke. Harry had the
impression that both had frozen. He continued, still
speaking to his fork, “You know, the one they were
trying to steal at the Ministry.” “Nobody knows what it said, though,” said Hermione
quickly. “It got smashed.” “Although the Prophet says — ” began Ron, but
Hermione said, “Shh!” “The Prophet’s got it right,” said Harry, looking up at
them both with a great effort: Hermione seemed
frightened and Ron amazed. “That glass ball that
smashed wasn’t the only record of the prophecy. I
heard the whole thing in Dumbledore ’s office, he was
the one the prophecy was made to, so he could tell
me. From what it said,” Harry took a deep breath, “it
looks like I’m the one who’s got to finish off
Voldemort. ... At least, it said neither of us could live
while the other survives.”
The three of them gazed at one another in silence for
a moment. Then there was a loud bang and Hermione
vanished behind a puff of black smoke. “Hermione!” shouted Harry and Ron; the breakfast
tray slid to the floor with a crash. Hermione emerged, coughing, out of the smoke,
clutching the telescope and sporting a brilliantly
purple black eye. “I squeezed it and it — it punched me!” she gasped. And sure enough, they now saw a tiny fist on a long
spring protruding from the end of the telescope. “Don’t worry,” said Ron, who was plainly trying not to
laugh, “Mumll fix that, she’s good at healing minor
injuries — ” “Oh well, never mind that now!” said Hermione
hastily. “Harry, oh, Harry ...” She sat down on the edge of his bed again. “We wondered, after we got back from the Ministry ...
Obviously, we didn’t want to say anything to you, but
from what Lucius Malfoy said about the prophecy,
how it was about you and Voldemort, well, we
thought it might be something like this. ... Oh, Harry
...” She stared at him, then whispered, “Are you
scared?” “Not as much as I was,” said Harry. “When I first
heard it, I was . . . but now, it seems as though I
always knew I’d have to face him in the end. ...” “When we heard Dumbledore was collecting you in
person, we thought he might be telling you something
or showing you something to do with the prophecy,”
said Ron eagerly. “And we were kind of right, weren’t
we? He wouldn’t be giving you lessons if he thought
you were a goner, wouldn’t waste his time — he must
think you’ve got a chance!” “That’s true,” said Hermione. “I wonder what he’ll
teach you, Harry? Really advanced defensive magic,
probably ... powerful countercurses ... anti-jinxes ...” Harry did not really listen. A warmth was spreading
through him that had nothing to do with the sunlight;
a tight obstruction in his chest seemed to be
dissolving. He knew that Ron and Hermione were
more shocked than they were letting on, but the mere
fact that they were still there on either side of him,
speaking bracing words of comfort, not shrinking
from him as though he were contaminated or
dangerous, was worth more than he could ever tell
them. "... and evasive enchantments generally,” concluded
Hermione. “Well, at least you know one lesson you’ll
be having this year, that’s one more than Ron and
me. I wonder when our O.W.L. results will come?” “Can’t be long now, it’s been a month,” said Ron. “Hang on,” said Harry, as another part of last night’s
conversation came back to him. “I think Dumbledore
said our O.W.L. results would be arriving today!” “Today?” shrieked Hermione. “Today? But why didn’t
you — oh my God — you should have said — ” She leapt to her feet. “I’m going to see whether any owls have come. ...”
But when Harry arrived downstairs ten minutes later,
fully dressed and carrying his empty breakfast tray, it
was to find Hermione sitting at the kitchen table in
great agitation, while Mrs. Weasley tried to lessen her
resemblance to half a panda. “It just won’t budge,” Mrs. Weasley was saying
anxiously, standing over Hermione with her wand in
her hand and a copy of The Healer’s Helpmate open at
“Bruises, Cuts, and Abrasions.” “This has always
worked before, I just can’t understand it.” “It’ll be Fred and George’s idea of a funny joke,
making sure it can’t come off,” said Ginny “But it’s got to come off!” squeaked Hermione. “I can’t
go around looking like this forever!” “You won’t, dear, we’ll find an antidote, don’t worry,”
said Mrs. Weasley soothingly. “Bill told me ’ow Fred and George are very amusing!”
said Fleur, smiling serenely. “Yes, I can hardly breathe for laughing,” snapped
Hermione. She jumped up and started walking round and round
the kitchen, twisting her fingers together. “Mrs. Weasley, you’re quite, quite sure no owls have
arrived this morning?” “Yes, dear, I’d have noticed,” said Mrs. Weasley
patiently. “But it’s barely nine, there’s still plenty of
time. ...” “I know I messed up Ancient Runes,” muttered
Hermione feverishly, “I definitely made at least one
serious mistranslation. And the Defense Against the
Dark Arts practical was no good at all. I thought
Transfiguration went all right at the time, but looking
back — ” “Hermione, will you shut up, you’re not the only one
who’s nervous!” barked Ron. “And when you’ve got
your eleven ‘Outstanding’ O.W.L.s ...” “Don’t, don’t, don’t!” said Hermione, flapping her
hands hysterically. “I know I’ve failed everything!” “What happens if we fail?” Harry asked the room at
large, but it was again Hermione who answered. “We discuss our options with our Head of House, I
asked Professor McGonagall at the end of last term.” Harry’s stomach squirmed. He wished he had eaten
less breakfast. “At Beauxbatons,” said Fleur complacently, “we ’ad a
different way of doing things. I think eet was better.
We sat our examinations after six years of study, not
five, and then — ” Fleur’s words were drowned in a scream. Hermione
was pointing through the kitchen window. Three
black specks were clearly visible in the sky, growing
larger all the time. “They’re definitely owls,” said Ron hoarsely, jumping
up to join Hermione at the window. “And there are three of them,” said Harry, hastening
to her other side. “One for each of us,” said Hermione in a terrified
whisper. “Oh no ... oh no ... oh no ...”
She gripped both Harry and Ron tightly around the
elbows. The owls were flying directly at the Burrow, three
handsome tawnies, each of which, it became clear as
they flew lower over the path leading up to the house,
was carrying a large square envelope. “Oh no\” squealed Hermione. Mrs. Weasley squeezed past them and opened the
kitchen window. One, two, three, the owls soared
through it and landed on the table in a neat line. All
three of them lifted their right legs. Harry moved forward. The letter addressed to him
was tied to the leg of the owl in the middle. He untied
it with fumbling fingers. To his left, Ron was trying to
detach his own results; to his right, Hermione’s
hands were shaking so much she was making her
whole owl tremble. Nobody in the kitchen spoke. At last, Harry managed
to detach the envelope. He slit it open quickly and
unfolded the parchment inside. ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL RESULTS Pass Grades Fail Grades Outstanding (O) Poor (P) Exceeds Expectations (E) Dreadful (D) Acceptable (A) Troll (T) Harry James Potter has achieved: Astronomy A Care of Magical Creatures E
Charms E Defense Against the Dark ArtsO
Divination P Herbology E History of Magic D Potions E Transfiguration E Harry read the parchment through several times, his
breathing becoming easier with each reading. It was
all right: He had always known that he would fail
Divination, and he had had no chance of passing
History of Magic, given that he had collapsed halfway
through the examination, but he had passed
everything else! He ran his finger down the grades ...
he had passed well in Transfiguration and Herbology,
he had even exceeded expectations at Potions! And
best of all, he had achieved “Outstanding” at Defense
Against the Dark Arts! He looked around. Hermione had her back to him and
her head bent, but Ron was looking delighted. “Only failed Divination and History of Magic, and who
cares about them?” he said happily to Harry. “Here —
swap — ” Harry glanced down Ron’s grades: There were no
“Outstandings” there. ... “Knew you’d be top at Defense Against the Dark Arts,”
said Ron, punching Harry on the shoulder. “We’ve
done all right, haven’t we?” “Well done!” said Mrs. Weasley proudly, ruffling Ron’s
hair. “Seven O.W.L.s, that’s more than Fred and
George got together!”
“Hermione?” said Ginny tentatively, for Hermione still
hadn’t turned around. “How did you do?” “I — not bad,” said Hermione in a small voice. “Oh, come off it,” said Ron, striding over to her and
whipping her results out of her hand. “Yep — nine
‘Outstandings’ and one ‘Exceeds Expectations’ at
Defense Against the Dark Arts.” He looked down at
her, half-amused, half-exasperated. “You’re actually
disappointed, aren’t you?” Hermione shook her head, but Harry laughed. “Well, we’re N.E.W.T. students now!” grinned Ron.
“Mum, are there any more sausages?” Harry looked back down at his results. They were as
good as he could have hoped for. He felt just one tiny
twinge of regret. ... This was the end of his ambition
to become an Auror. He had not secured the required
Potions grade. He had known all along that he
wouldn’t, but he still felt a sinking in his stomach as
he looked again at that small black E. It was odd, really, seeing that it had been a Death
Eater in disguise who had first told Harry he would
make a good Auror, but somehow the idea had taken
hold of him, and he couldn’t really think of anything
else he would like to be. Moreover, it had seemed the
right destiny for him since he had heard the prophecy
a few weeks ago. ... Neither can live while the other
survives. ... Wouldn’t he be living up to the prophecy,
and giving himself the best chance of survival, if he
joined those highly trained wizards whose job it was
to find and kill Voldemort?
DRACO’S DETOUR Harry remained within the confines of the Burrow’s
garden over the next few weeks. He spent most of his
days playing two-a-side Quidditch in the Weasleys’
orchard (he and Hermione against Ron and Ginny;
Hermione was dreadful and Ginny good, so they were
reasonably well matched) and his evenings eating
triple helpings of everything Mrs. Weasley put in front
of him. It would have been a happy, peaceful holiday had it
not been for the stories of disappearances, odd
accidents, even of deaths now appearing almost daily
in the Prophet Sometimes Bill and Mr. Weasley
brought home news before it even reached the paper.
To Mrs. Weasley’s displeasure, Harry’s sixteenth
birthday celebrations were marred by grisly tidings
brought to the party by Remus Lupin, who was
looking gaunt and grim, his brown hair streaked
liberally with gray, his clothes more ragged and
patched than ever.  “There have been another couple of dementor
attacks,” he announced, as Mrs. Weasley passed him
a large slice of birthday cake. “And they’ve found Igor
Karkaroff’s body in a shack up north. The Dark Mark
had been set over it — well, frankly, I’m surprised he
stayed alive for even a year after deserting the Death
Eaters; Sirius’s brother, Regulus, only managed a few
days as far as I can remember.” “Yes, well,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowning, “perhaps we
should talk about something diff — ” “Did you hear about Florean Fortescue, Remus?”
asked Bill, who was being plied with wine by Fleur.
“The man who ran — ” “ — the ice-cream place in Diagon Alley?” Harry
interrupted, with an unpleasant, hollow sensation in
the pit of his stomach. “He used to give me free ice
creams. What’s happened to him?” “Dragged off, by the look of his place.” “Why?” asked Ron, while Mrs. Weasley pointedly
glared at Bill. “Who knows? He must’ve upset them somehow. He
was a good man, Florean.” “Talking of Diagon Alley,” said Mr. Weasley, “looks
like Ollivander’s gone too.” “The wandmaker?” said Ginny, looking startled. “That’s the one. Shop’s empty. No sign of a struggle.
No one knows whether he left voluntarily or was
kidnapped.” “But wands — what’ll people do for wands?”
“They’ll make do with other makers,” said Lupin. “But
Ollivander was the best, and if the other side have got
him it’s not so good for us.” The day after this rather gloomy birthday tea, their
letters and booklists arrived from Hogwarts. Harry’s
included a surprise: He had been made Quidditch
Captain. “That gives you equal status with prefects!” cried
Hermione happily. “You can use our special bathroom
now and everything!” “Wow, I remember when Charlie wore one of these,”
said Ron, examining the badge with glee. “Harry, this
is so cool, you’re my Captain — if you let me back on
the team, I suppose, ha ha. ...” “Well, I don’t suppose we can put off a trip to Diagon
Alley much longer now you’ve got these,” sighed Mrs.
Weasley, looking down Ron’s booklist. “We’ll go on
Saturday as long as your father doesn’t have to go
into work again. I’m not going there without him.” “Mum, d’you honestly think You-Know- Who’s going to
be hiding behind a bookshelf in Flourish and Blotts?”
sniggered Ron. “Fortescue and Ollivander went on holiday, did they?”
said Mrs. Weasley, firing up at once. “If you think
security’s a laughing matter you can stay behind and
I’ll get your things myself — ” “No, I wanna come, I want to see Fred and George’s
shop!” said Ron hastily. “Then you just buck up your ideas, young man,
before I decide you’re too immature to come with us!”
said Mrs. Weasley angrily, snatching up her clock, all
nine hands of which were still pointing at “mortal
peril,” and balancing it on top of a pile of just-
laundered towels. “And that goes for returning to
Hogwarts as well!” Ron turned to stare incredulously at Harry as his
mother hoisted the laundry basket and the teetering
clock into her arms and stormed out of the room. “Blimey ... you can’t even make a joke round here
anymore. ...” But Ron was careful not to be flippant about
Voldemort over the next few days. Saturday dawned
without any more outbursts from Mrs. Weasley,
though she seemed very tense at breakfast. Bill, who
would be staying at home with Fleur (much to
Hermione and Ginny’s pleasure), passed a full money
bag across the table to Harry. “Where’s mine?” demanded Ron at once, his eyes
wide. “That’s already Harry’s, idiot,” said Bill. “I got it out of
your vault for you, Harry, because it’s taking about
five hours for the public to get to their gold at the
moment, the goblins have tightened security so
much. Two days ago Arkie Philpott had a Probity
Probe stuck up his ... Well, trust me, this way’s
easier.” “Thanks, Bill,” said Harry, pocketing his gold. “ ’E is always so thoughtful,” purred Fleur adoringly,
stroking Bill’s nose. Ginny mimed vomiting into her
cereal behind Fleur. Harry choked over his
cornflakes, and Ron thumped him on the back.
It was an overcast, murky day. One of the special
Ministry of Magic cars, in which Harry had ridden
once before, was awaiting them in the front yard
when they emerged from the house, pulling on their
cloaks. “It’s good Dad can get us these again,” said Ron
appreciatively, stretching luxuriously as the car
moved smoothly away from the Burrow, Bill and Fleur
waving from the kitchen window. He, Harry, Hermione, and Ginny were all sitting in roomy
comfort in the wide backseat. “Don’t get used to it, it’s only because of Harry,” said
Mr. Weasley over his shoulder. He and Mrs. Weasley
were in front with the Ministry driver; the front
passenger seat had obligingly stretched into what
resembled a two-seater sofa. “He’s been given top-
grade security status. And we’ll be joining up with
additional security at the Leaky Cauldron too.” Harry said nothing; he did not much fancy doing his
shopping while surrounded by a battalion of Aurors.
He had stowed his Invisibility Cloak in his backpack
and felt that, if that was good enough for
Dumbledore, it ought to be good enough for the
Ministry, though now he came to think of it, he was
not sure the Ministry knew about his cloak. “Here you are, then,” said the driver, a surprisingly
short while later, speaking for the first time as he
slowed in Charing Cross Road and stopped outside
the Leaky Cauldron. “I’m to wait for you, any idea
how long you  be?” “A couple of hours, I expect,” said Mr. Weasley. “Ah,
good, he’s here!”
Harry imitated Mr. Weasley and peered through the
window; his heart leapt. There were no Aurors waiting
outside the inn, but instead the gigantic, black-
bearded form of Rubeus Hagrid, the Hogwarts
gamekeeper, wearing a long beaverskin coat, beaming
at the sight of Harry’s face and oblivious to the
startled stares of passing Muggles. “Harry!” he boomed, sweeping Harry into a bone-
crushing hug the moment Harry had stepped out of
the car. “Buckbeak — Witherwings, I mean — yeh
should see him, Harry, he’s so happy ter be back in
the open air — ” “Glad he’s pleased,” said Harry, grinning as he
massaged his ribs. “We didn’t know ‘security’ meant
you!” “I know, jus’ like old times, innit? See, the Ministry
wanted ter send a bunch o’ Aurors, but Dumbledore
said I’d do,” said Hagrid proudly, throwing out his
chest and tucking his thumbs into his pockets. “Let’s
get goin’ then — after yeh, Molly, Arthur — ” The Leaky Cauldron was, for the first time in Harry’s
memory, completely empty. Only Tom the landlord,
wizened and toothless, remained of the old crowd. He
looked up hopefully as they entered, but before he
could speak, Hagrid said importantly, “Jus’ passin’
through today, Tom, sure yeh understand, Hogwarts
business, yeh know.” Tom nodded gloomily and returned to wiping glasses;
Harry, Hermione, Hagrid, and the Weasleys walked
through the bar and out into the chilly little courtyard
at the back where the dustbins stood. Hagrid raised
his pink umbrella and rapped a certain brick in the
wall, which opened at once to form an archway onto a
winding cobbled street. They stepped through the
entrance and paused, looking around. Diagon Alley had changed. The colorful, glittering
window displays of spellbooks, potion ingredients,
and cauldrons were lost to view, hidden behind the
large Ministry of Magic posters that had been pasted
over them. Most of these somber purple posters
carried blown-up versions of the security advice on
the Ministry pamphlets that had been sent out over
the summer, but others bore moving black-and-white
photographs of Death Eaters known to be on the
loose. Bellatrix Lestrange was sneering from the front
of the nearest apothecary. A few windows were
boarded up, including those of Florean Fortescue’s Ice
Cream Parlor. On the other hand, a number of
shabby-looking stalls had sprung up along the street.
The nearest one, which had been erected outside
Flourish and Blotts, under a striped, stained awning,
had a cardboard sign pinned to its front: AMULETS Effective Against Werewolves, Dementors, and Inferi A seedy-looking little wizard was rattling armfuls of
silver symbols on chains at passersby. “One for your little girl, madam?” he called at Mrs.
Weasley as they passed, leering at Ginny. “Protect her
pretty neck?” “If I were on duty ...” said Mr. Weasley, glaring angrily
at the amulet seller. “Yes, but don’t go arresting anyone now, dear, we’re
in a hurry,” said Mrs. Weasley, nervously consulting a
list. “I think we’d better do Madam Malkin’s first,
Hermione wants new dress robes, and Ron’s showing
much too much ankle in his school robes, and you
must need new ones too, Harry, you’ve grown so
much — come on, everyone — ” “Molly, it doesn’t make sense for all of us to go to
Madam Malkin’s,” said Mr. Weasley. “Why don’t those
three go with Hagrid, and we can go to Flourish and
Blotts and get everyone’s schoolbooks?” “I don’t know,” said Mrs. Weasley anxiously, clearly
torn between a desire to finish the shopping quickly
and the wish to stick together in a pack. “Hagrid, do
you think — ?” “Don’ fret, they’ll be fine with me, Molly,” said Hagrid
soothingly, waving an airy hand the size of a dustbin
lid. Mrs. Weasley did not look entirely convinced, but
allowed the separation, scurrying off toward Flourish
and Blotts with her husband and Ginny while Harry,
Ron, Hermione, and Hagrid set off for Madam
Malkin’s. Harry noticed that many of the people who passed
them had the same harried, anxious look as Mrs.
Weasley, and that nobody was stopping to talk
anymore; the shoppers stayed together in their own
tightly knit groups, moving intently about their
business. Nobody seemed to be shopping alone. “Migh’ be a bit of a squeeze in there with all of us,”
said Hagrid, stopping outside Madam Malkin’s and
bending down to peer through the window. “I’ll stand
guard outside, all right?” So Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the little shop
together. It appeared, at first glance, to be empty, but
no sooner had the door swung shut behind them than
they heard a familiar voice issuing from behind a rack
of dress robes in spangled green and blue.
"... not a child, in case you haven’t noticed, Mother. I
am perfectly capable of doing my shopping alone.” There was a clucking noise and a voice Harry
recognized as that of Madam Malkin, the owner, said,
“Now, dear, your mother’s quite right, none of us is
supposed to go wandering around on our own
anymore, it’s nothing to do with being a child — ” “Watch where you’re sticking that pin, will you!” A teenage boy with a pale, pointed face and white-
blond hair appeared from behind the rack, wearing a
handsome set of dark green robes that glittered with
pins around the hem and the edges of the sleeves. He
strode to the mirror and examined himself; it was a
few moments before he noticed Harry, Ron, and
Hermione reflected over his shoulder. His light gray
eyes narrowed. “If you’re wondering what the smell is, Mother, a
Mudblood just walked in,” said Draco Malfoy. “I don’t think there’s any need for language like that!”
said Madam Malkin, scurrying out from behind the
clothes rack holding a tape measure and a wand.
“And I don’t want wands drawn in my shop either!”
she added hastily, for a glance toward the door had
shown her Harry and Ron both standing there with
their wands out and pointing at Malfoy. Hermione,
who was standing slightly behind them, whispered,
“No, don’t, honestly, it’s not worth it. ...” “Yeah, like you’d dare do magic out of school,”
sneered Malfoy. “Who blacked your eye, Granger? I
want to send them flowers.”
“That’s quite enough!” said Madam Malkin sharply,
looking over her shoulder for support. “Madam —
please — ” Narcissa Malfoy strolled out from behind the clothes
rack. “Put those away,” she said coldly to Harry and Ron. “If you attack my son again, I shall ensure that it is
the last thing you ever do.” “Really?” said Harry, taking a step forward and gazing
into the smoothly arrogant face that, for all its pallor,
still resembled her sister’s. He was as tall as she was
now. “Going to get a few Death Eater pals to do us in,
are you?” Madam Malkin squealed and clutched at her heart. “Really, you shouldn’t accuse — dangerous thing to
say — wands away, please!” But Harry did not lower his wand. Narcissa Malfoy
smiled unpleasantly. “I see that being Dumbledore’s favorite has given you
a false sense of security, Harry Potter. But
Dumbledore won’t always be there to protect you.” Harry looked mockingly all around the shop. “Wow ...
look at that ... he’s not here now! So why not have a
go? They might be able to find you a double cell in
Azkaban with your loser of a husband!” Malfoy made an angry movement toward Harry, but
stumbled over his overlong robe. Ron laughed loudly. “Don’t you dare talk to my mother like that, Potter!”
Malfoy snarled.
“It’s all right, Draco,” said Narcissa, restraining him
with her thin white fingers upon his shoulder. “I
expect Potter will be reunited with dear Sirius before I
am reunited with Lucius.” Harry raised his wand higher. “Harry, no!” moaned Hermione, grabbing his arm and
attempting to push it down by his side. “Think. ... You mustn’t. ... You’ll be in such trouble. ...” Madam Malkin dithered for a moment on the spot,
then seemed to decide to act as though nothing was
happening in the hope that it wouldn’t. She bent
toward Malfoy, who was still glaring at Harry. “I think this left sleeve could come up a little bit more,
dear, let me just — ” “Ouch!” bellowed Malfoy, slapping her hand away.
“Watch where you’re putting your pins, woman!
Mother — I don’t think I want these anymore — ” He pulled the robes over his head and threw them
onto the floor at Madam Malkin’s feet. “You’re right, Draco,” said Narcissa, with a
contemptuous glance at Hermione, “now I know the
kind of scum that shops here. ... We’ll do better at
Twilfitt and Tatting’s.” And with that, the pair of them strode out of the
shop, Malfoy taking care to bang as hard as he could
into Ron on the way out. “Well, reallyl” said Madam Malkin, snatching up the
fallen robes and moving the tip of her wand over them
like a vacuum cleaner, so that it removed all the dust.
She was distracted all through the fitting of Ron’s and
Harry’s new robes, tried to sell Hermione wizard’s
dress robes instead of witch’s, and when she finally
bowed them out of the shop it was with an air of
being glad to see the back of them. “Got ev’rything?” asked Hagrid brightly when they
reappeared at his side. “Just about,” said Harry. “Did you see the Malfoys?” “Yeah,” said Hagrid, unconcerned. “Bu’ they wouldn’
dare make trouble in the middle o’ Diagon Alley,
Harry. Don’ worry abou’ them.” Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged looks, but
before they could disabuse Hagrid of this comfortable
notion, Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Ginny appeared, all
clutching heavy packages of books. “Everyone all right?” said Mrs. Weasley. “Got your
robes? Right then, we can pop in at the Apothecary
and Eeylops on the way to Fred and George’s — stick
close, now. ...” Neither Harry nor Ron bought any ingredients at the
Apothecary, seeing that they were no longer studying
Potions, but both bought large boxes of owl nuts for
Hedwig and Pigwidgeon at Eeylops Owl Emporium.
Then, with Mrs. Weasley checking her watch every
minute or so, they headed farther along the street in
search of Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, the joke shop
run by Fred and George. “We really haven’t got too long,” Mrs. Weasley said. “So we’ll just have a quick look around and then back
to the car. We must be close, that’s number ninety-
two ... ninety-four ...”
“Whoa,” said Ron, stopping in his tracks. Set against the dull, poster-muffled shop fronts
around them, Fred and George’s windows hit the eye
like a firework display. Casual passersby were looking
back over their shoulders at the windows, and a few
rather stunned-looking people had actually come to a
halt, transfixed. The left-hand window was dazzlingly
full of an assortment of goods that revolved, popped,
flashed, bounced, and shrieked; Harry’s eyes began to
water just looking at it. The right-hand window was
covered with a gigantic poster, purple like those of the
Ministry, but emblazoned with flashing yellow letters: WHY ARE YOU WORRYING ABOUT YOU-KNOW-WHO? YOU SHOULD BE WORRYING ABOUT
U-NO-POO— THE CONSTIPATION SENSATION
THAT’S GRIPPING THE NATION! Harry started to laugh. He heard a weak sort of moan
beside him and looked around to see Mrs. Weasley
gazing, dumbfounded, at the poster. Her lips moved
silently, mouthing the name “U-No-Poo.” “They’ll be murdered in their beds!” she whispered. “No they won’t!” said Ron, who, like Harry, was
laughing. “This is brilliant!” And he and Harry led the way into the shop. It was
packed with customers; Harry could not get near the
shelves. He stared around, looking up at the boxes
piled to the ceiling: Here were the Skiving Snackboxes
that the twins had perfected during their last,
unfinished year at Hogwarts; Harry noticed that the
Nosebleed Nougat was most popular, with only one
battered box left on the shelf. There were bins full of
trick wands, the cheapest merely turning into rubber
chickens or pairs of briefs when waved, the most
expensive beating the unwary user around the head
and neck, and boxes of quills, which came in Self-
Inking, Spell-Checking, and Smart-Answer varieties. A space cleared in the crowd, and Harry pushed his
way toward the counter, where a gaggle of delighted
ten-year-olds was watching a tiny little wooden man
slowly ascending the steps to a real set of gallows,
both perched on a box that read: REUSABLE
HANGMAN — SPELL IT OR HE’LL SWING! “ ‘Patented Daydream Charms . . . ’ ” Hermione had managed to squeeze through to a large
display near the counter and was reading the
information on the back of a box bearing a highly
colored picture of a handsome youth and a swooning
girl who were standing on the deck of a pirate ship. “ ‘One simple incantation and you will enter a top-
quality, highly realistic, thirty-minute daydream, easy
to fit into the average school lesson and virtually
undetectable (side effects include vacant expression
and minor drooling). Not for sale to under-sixteens.’
You know,” said Hermione, looking up at Harry, “that
really is extraordinary magic!” “For that, Hermione,” said a voice behind them, “you
can have one for free.”
A beaming Fred stood before them, wearing a set of
magenta robes that clashed magnificently with his
flaming hair. “How are you, Harry?” They shook hands. “And
what’s happened to your eye, Hermione?” “Your punching telescope,” she said ruefully. “Oh blimey, I forgot about those,” said Fred. “Here — ” He pulled a tub out of his pocket and handed it to
her; she unscrewed it gingerly to reveal a thick yellow
paste. “Just dab it on, that bruise’ll be gone within the
hour,” said Fred. “We had to find a decent bruise
remover. We’re testing most of our products on
ourselves.” Hermione looked nervous. “It is safe, isn’t it?” she
asked. “ ’Course it is,” said Fred bracingly. “Come on, Harry,
I’ll give you a tour.” Harry left Hermione dabbing her black eye with paste
and followed Fred toward the back of the shop, where
he saw a stand of card and rope tricks. “Muggle magic tricks!” said Fred happily, pointing
them out. “For freaks like Dad, you know, who love
Muggle stuff. It’s not a big earner, but we do fairly
steady business, they’re great novelties. ... Oh, here’s
George. ...” Fred’s twin shook Harry’s hand energetically.
“Giving him the tour? Come through the back, Harry,
that’s where we’re making the real money — pocket
anything, you, and you’ll pay in more than GalleonsV’
he added warningly to a small boy who hastily
whipped his hand out of the tub labeled EDIBLE
DARK MARKS — THEY’LL MAKE ANYONE SICK! George pushed back a curtain beside the Muggle
tricks and Harry saw a darker, less crowded room.
The packaging on the products lining these shelves
was more subdued. “We’ve just developed this more serious line,” said
Fred. “Funny how it happened ...” “You wouldn’t believe how many people, even people
who work at the Ministry, can’t do a decent Shield
Charm,” said George. “ ’Course, they didn’t have you
teaching them, Harry.” “That’s right. ... Well, we thought Shield Hats were a
bit of a laugh, you know, challenge your mate to jinx
you while wearing it and watch his face when the jinx
just bounces off. But the Ministry bought five
hundred for all its support staff! And we’re still
getting massive orders!” “So we’ve expanded into a range of Shield Cloaks,
Shield Gloves ...” "... I mean, they wouldn’t help much against the
Unforgivable Curses, but for minor to moderate hexes
or jinxes ...” “And then we thought we’d get into the whole area of
Defense Against the Dark Arts, because it’s such a
money spinner,” continued George enthusiastically.
“This is cool. Look, Instant Darkness Powder, we’re
importing it from Peru. Handy if you want to make a
quick escape.” “And our Decoy Detonators are just walking off the
shelves, look,” said Fred, pointing at a number of
weird-looking black horn-type objects that were
indeed attempting to scurry out of sight. “You just
drop one surreptitiously and it’ll run off and make a
nice loud noise out of sight, giving you a diversion if
you need one. “Handy,” said Harry, impressed. “Here,” said George, catching a couple and throwing
them to Harry. A young witch with short blonde hair poked her head
around the curtain; Harry saw that she too was
wearing magenta staff robes. “There’s a customer out here looking for a joke
cauldron, Mr. Weasley and Mr. Weasley,” she said. Harry found it very odd to hear Fred and George
called “Mr. Weasley,” but they took it in their stride. “Right you are, Verity, I’m coming,” said George
promptly. “Harry, you help yourself to anything you
want, all right? No charge.” “I can’t do that!” said Harry, who had already pulled
out his money bag to pay for the Decoy Detonators. “You don’t pay here,” said Fred firmly, waving away
Harry’s gold. “But — ”
“You gave us our start-up loan, we haven’t forgotten,”
said George sternly. “Take whatever you like, and just
remember to tell people where you got it, if they ask.” George swept off through the curtain to help with the
customers, and Fred led Harry back into the main
part of the shop to find Hermione and Ginny still
poring over the Patented Daydream Charms. “Haven’t you girls found our special WonderWitch
products yet?” asked Fred. “Follow me, ladies. ...” Near the window was an array of violently pink
products around which a cluster of excited girls was
giggling enthusiastically. Hermione and Ginny both
hung back, looking wary. “There you go,” said Fred proudly. “Best range of love
potions you’ll find anywhere.” Ginny raised an eyebrow skeptically. “Do they work?”
she asked. “Certainly they work, for up to twenty-four hours at a
time depending on the weight of the boy in question “ — and the attractiveness of the girl,” said George,
reappearing suddenly at their side. “But we’re not
selling them to our sister,” he added, becoming
suddenly stern, “not when she’s already got about five
boys on the go from what we’ve — ” “Whatever you’ve heard from Ron is a big fat lie,” said
Ginny calmly, leaning forward to take a small pink
pot off the shelf. “What’s this?” “Guaranteed ten-second pimple vanisher,” said Fred.
“Excellent on everything from boils to blackheads, but
don’t change the subject. Are you or are you not
currently going out with a boy called Dean Thomas?” “Yes, I am,” said Ginny. “And last time I looked, he
was definitely one boy, not five. What are those?” She was pointing at a number of round balls of fluff
in shades of pink and purple, all rolling around the
bottom of a cage and emitting high-pitched squeaks. “Pygmy Puffs,” said George. “Miniature puffskeins, we
can’t breed them fast enough. So what about Michael
Corner?” “I dumped him, he was a bad loser,” said Ginny,
putting a finger through the bars of the cage and
watching the Pygmy Puffs crowd around it. “They’re
really cute!” “They’re fairly cuddly, yes,” conceded Fred. “But
you’re moving through boyfriends a bit fast, aren’t
you?” Ginny turned to look at him, her hands on her hips.
There was such a Mrs. Weasley-ish glare on her face
that Harry was surprised Fred didn’t recoil. “It’s none of your business. And I’ll thank you,” she
added angrily to Ron, who had just appeared at
George’s elbow, laden with merchandise, “not to tell
tales about me to these two!” “That’s three Galleons, nine Sickles, and a Knut,” said
Fred, examining the many boxes in Ron’s arms.
“Cough up.” “I’m your brother!”
“And that’s our stuff you’re nicking. Three Galleons,
nine Sickles. I’ll knock off the Knut.” “But I haven’t got three Galleons, nine Sickles!” “You’d better put it back then, and mind you put it on
the right shelves.” Ron dropped several boxes, swore, and made a rude
hand gesture at Fred that was unfortunately spotted
by Mrs. Weasley, who had chosen that moment to
appear. “If I see you do that again I’ll jinx your fingers
together,” she said sharply. “Mum, can I have a Pygmy Puff?” said Ginny at once.
“A what?” said Mrs. Weasley warily. “Look, they’re so sweet. ...” Mrs. Weasley moved aside to look at the Pygmy Puffs,
and Harry, Ron, and Hermione momentarily had an
unimpeded view out of the window. Draco Malfoy was
hurrying up the street alone. As he passed Weasleys’
Wizard Wheezes, he glanced over his shoulder.
Seconds later, he moved beyond the scope of the
window and they lost sight of him. “Wonder where his mummy is?” said Harry, frowning. “Given her the slip by the looks of it,” said Ron. “Why, though?” said Hermione. Harry said nothing; he was thinking too hard. Narcissa Malfoy would not have let her precious son
out of her sight willingly; Malfoy must have made a
real effort to free himself from her clutches. Harry,
knowing and loathing Malfoy, was sure the reason
could not be innocent. He glanced around. Mrs. Weasley and Ginny were
bending over the Pygmy Puffs. Mr. Weasley was
delightedly examining a pack of Muggle marked
playing cards. Fred and George were both helping
customers. On the other side of the glass, Hagrid was
standing with his back to them, looking up and down
the street. “Get under here, quick,” said Harry, pulling his
Invisibility Cloak out of his bag. “Oh — I don’t know, Harry,” said Hermione, looking
uncertainly toward Mrs. Weasley. “Come on\” said Ron. She hesitated for a second longer, then ducked under
the cloak with Harry and Ron. Nobody noticed them
vanish; they were all too interested in Fred and
George’s products. Harry, Ron, and Hermione
squeezed their way out of the door as quickly as they
could, but by the time they gained the street, Malfoy
had disappeared just as successfully as they had. “He was going in that direction,” murmured Harry as
quietly as possible, so that the humming Hagrid
would not hear them. “C’mon.” They scurried along, peering left and right, through
shop windows and doors, until Hermione pointed
ahead. “That’s him, isn’t it?” she whispered. “Turning left?”
“Big surprise,” whispered Ron.
For Malfoy had glanced around, then slid into
Knockturn Alley and out of sight. “Quick, or we’ll lose him,” said Harry, speeding up. “Our feet’ll be seen!” said Hermione anxiously, as the
cloak flapped a little around their ankles; it was much
more difficult hiding all three of them under the cloak
nowadays. “It doesn’t matter,” said Harry impatiently. “Just
hurry!” But Knockturn Alley, the side street devoted to the
Dark Arts, looked completely deserted. They peered
into windows as they passed, but none of the shops
seemed to have any customers at all. Harry supposed
it was a bit of a giveaway in these dangerous and
suspicious times to buy Dark artifacts — or at least,
to be seen buying them. Hermione gave his arm a hard pinch. “Ouch!” “Shh! Look! He’s in there!” she breathed in Harry’s
ear. They had drawn level with the only shop in
Knockturn Alley that Harry had ever visited, Borgin
and Burkes, which sold a wide variety of sinister
objects. There in the midst of the cases full of skulls
and old bottles stood Draco Malfoy with his back to
them, just visible beyond the very same large black
cabinet in which Harry had once hidden to avoid
Malfoy and his father. Judging by the movements of
Malfoy’s hands, he was talking animatedly. The
proprietor of the shop, Mr. Borgin, an oily-haired,
stooping man, stood facing Malfoy. He was wearing a
curious expression of mingled resentment and fear. “If only we could hear what they’re saying!” said
Hermione. “We can!” said Ron excitedly. “Hang on — damn — ” He dropped a couple more of the boxes he was still
clutching as he fumbled with the largest. “Extendable Ears, look!” “Fantastic!” said Hermione, as Ron unraveled the
long, fleshcolored strings and began to feed them
toward the bottom of the door. “Oh, I hope the door
isn’t Imperturbable — ” “No!” said Ron gleefully. “Listen!” They put their heads together and listened intently to
the ends of the strings, through which Malfoy’s voice
could be heard loud and clear, as though a radio had
been turned on. "... you know how to fix it?” “Possibly,” said Borgin, in a tone that suggested he
was unwilling to commit himself. “I’ll need to see it,
though. Why don’t you bring it into the shop?” “I can’t,” said Malfoy. “It’s got to stay put. I just need
you to tell me how to do it.” Harry saw Borgin lick his lips nervously. “Well, without seeing it, I must say it will be a very
difficult job, perhaps impossible. I couldn’t guarantee
anything.”
“No?” said Malfoy, and Harry knew, just by his tone,
that Malfoy was sneering. “Perhaps this will make you
more confident.” He moved toward Borgin and was blocked from view
by the cabinet. Harry, Ron, and Hermione shuffled
sideways to try and keep him in sight, but all they
could see was Borgin, looking very frightened. “Tell anyone,” said Malfoy, “and there will be
retribution. You know Fenrir Greyback? He’s a family
friend. He’ll be dropping in from time to time to make
sure you’re giving the problem your full attention.” “There will be no need for — ” “I’ll decide that,” said Malfoy. “Well, I’d better be off.
And don’t forget to keep that one safe, I’ll need it.” “Perhaps you’d like to take it now?” “No, of course I wouldn’t, you stupid little man, how
would I look carrying that down the street? Just don’t
sell it.” “Of course not ... sir.” Borgin made a bow as deep as the one Harry had
once seen him give Lucius Malfoy. “Not a word to anyone, Borgin, and that includes my
mother, understand?” “Naturally, naturally,” murmured Borgin, bowing
again. Next moment, the bell over the door tinkled loudly as
Malfoy stalked out of the shop looking very pleased
with himself. He passed so close to Harry, Ron, and
Hermione that they felt the cloak flutter around their
knees again. Inside the shop, Borgin remained frozen;
his unctuous smile had vanished; he looked worried. “What was that about?” whispered Ron, reeling in the
Extendable Ears. “Dunno,” said Harry, thinking hard. “He wants
something mended . . . and he wants to reserve
something in there. ... Could you see what he pointed
at when he said ‘that one’?” “No, he was behind that cabinet — ” “You two stay here,” whispered Hermione. “What are you — ?” But Hermione had already ducked out from under the
cloak. She checked her hair in the reflection in the
glass, then marched into the shop, setting the bell
tinkling again. Ron hastily fed the Extendable Ears
back under the door and passed one of the strings to
Harry. “Hello, horrible morning, isn’t it?” Hermione said
brightly to Borgin, who did not answer, but cast her a
suspicious look. Humming cheerily, Hermione strolled
through the jumble of objects on display. “Is this necklace for sale?” she asked, pausing beside
a glass-fronted case. “If you’ve got one and a half thousand Galleons,” said
Mr. Borgin coldly. “Oh — er — no, I haven’t got quite that much,” said
Hermione, walking on. “And ... what about this lovely
— um — skull?”
“Sixteen Galleons.” “So it’s for sale, then? It isn’t being ... kept for
anyone?” Mr. Borgin squinted at her. Harry had the nasty
feeling he knew exactly what Hermione was up to.
Apparently Hermione felt she had been rumbled too
because she suddenly threw caution to the winds. “The thing is, that — er — boy who was in here just
now, Draco Malfoy, well, he’s a friend of mine, and I
want to get him a birthday present, but if he’s already
reserved anything, I obviously don’t want to get him
the same thing, so ... um ...” It was a pretty lame story in Harry’s opinion, and
apparently Borgin thought so too. “Out,” he said sharply. “Get out!” Hermione did not wait to be asked twice, but hurried
to the door with Borgin at her heels. As the bell
tinkled again, Borgin slammed the door behind her
and put up the closed sign. “Ah well,” said Ron, throwing the cloak back over
Hermione. “Worth a try, but you were a bit obvious — “Well, next time you can show me how it’s done,
Master of Mystery!” she snapped. Ron and Hermione bickered all the way back to
Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, where they were forced to
stop so that they could dodge undetected around a
very anxious-looking Mrs. Weasley and Hagrid, who
had clearly noticed their absence. Once in the shop,
Harry whipped off the Invisibility Cloak, hid it in his
bag, and joined in with the other two when they
insisted, in answer to Mrs. Weasley’s accusations,
that they had been in the back room all along, and
that she could not have looked properly.
THE SLUG CLUB Harry spent a lot of the last week of the holidays
pondering the meaning of Malfoy’s behavior in
Knockturn Alley. What disturbed him most was the
satisfied look on Malfoy’s face as he had left the shop.
Nothing that made Malfoy look that happy could be
good news. To his slight annoyance, however, neither
Ron nor Hermione seemed quite as curious about
Malfoy’s activities as he was; or at least, they seemed
to get bored of discussing it after a few days. “Yes, I’ve already agreed it was fishy, Harry,” said
Hermione a little impatiently. She was sitting on the
windowsill in Fred and George’s room with her feet up
on one of the cardboard boxes and had only
grudgingly looked up from her new copy of Advanced
Rune Translation. “But haven’t we agreed there could
be a lot of explanations?” “Maybe he’s broken his Hand of Glory,” said Ron
vaguely, as he attempted to straighten his  broomstick’s bent tail twigs. “Remember that
shriveled-up arm Malfoy had?” “But what about when he said, ‘Don’t forget to keep
that one safe’?” asked Harry for the umpteenth time.
“That sounded to me like Borgin’s got another one of
the broken objects, and Malfoy wants both.” “You reckon?” said Ron, now trying to scrape some
dirt off his broom handle. “Yeah, I do,” said Harry. When neither Ron nor
Hermione answered, he said, “Malfoy’s father’s in
Azkaban. Don’t you think Malfoy’d like revenge?” Ron looked up, blinking. “Malfoy, revenge? What can he do about it?” “That’s my point, I don’t know!” said Harry,
frustrated. “But he’s up to something and I think we
should take it seriously. His father’s a Death Eater
and — ” Harry broke off, his eyes fixed on the window behind
Hermione, his mouth open. A startling thought had
just occurred to him. “Harry?” said Hermione in an anxious voice. “What’s
wrong?” “Your scar’s not hurting again, is it?” asked Ron
nervously. “He’s a Death Eater,” said Harry slowly. “He’s
replaced his father as a Death Eater!”
There was a silence; then Ron erupted in laughter.
“Malfoy? He’s sixteen, Harry! You think You-Know-
Who would let Malfoy join?” “It seems very unlikely, Harry,” said Hermione in a
repressive sort of voice. “What makes you think — ?” “In Madam Malkin’s. She didn’t touch him, but he
yelled and jerked his arm away from her when she
went to roll up his sleeve. It was his left arm. He’s
been branded with the Dark Mark.” Ron and Hermione looked at each other. “Well ...” said Ron, sounding thoroughly unconvinced. “I think he just wanted to get out of there, Harry,”
said Hermione. “He showed Borgin something we couldn’t see,” Harry
pressed on stubbornly. “Something that seriously
scared Borgin. It was the Mark, I know it — he was
showing Borgin who he was dealing with, you saw
how seriously Borgin took him!” Ron and Hermione exchanged another look. “I’m not sure, Harry. ...” “Yeah, I still don’t reckon You-Know-Who would let
Malfoy join. ...” Annoyed, but absolutely convinced he was right, Harry snatched up a pile of filthy Quidditch robes and
left the room; Mrs. Weasley had been urging them for
days not to leave their washing and packing until the
last moment. On the landing he bumped into Ginny,
who was returning to her room carrying a pile of
freshly laundered clothes.
“I wouldn’t go in the kitchen just now,” she warned
him. “There’s a lot of Phlegm around.” “I’ll be careful not to slip in it.” Harry smiled. Sure enough, when he entered the kitchen it was to
find Fleur sitting at the kitchen table, in full flow
about plans for her wedding to Bill, while Mrs.
Weasley kept watch over a pile of self-peeling sprouts,
looking bad-tempered. “... Bill and I ’ave almost decided on only two
bridesmaids, Ginny and Gabrielle will look very sweet
togezzer. I am theenking of dressing zem in pale gold
— pink would of course be ’orrible with Ginny’s ’air — “Ah, Harry!” said Mrs. Weasley loudly, cutting across
Fleur’s monologue. “Good, I wanted to explain about
the security arrangements for the journey to
Hogwarts tomorrow. We’ve got Ministry cars again,
and there will be Aurors waiting at the station — ” “Is Tonks going to be there?” asked Harry, handing
over his Quidditch things. “No, I don’t think so, she’s been stationed somewhere
else from what Arthur said.” “She has let ’erself go, zat Tonks,” Fleur mused,
examining her own stunning reflection in the back of
a teaspoon. “A big mistake if you ask — ” “Yes, thank you,” said Mrs. Weasley tartly, cutting
across Fleur again. “You’d better get on, Harry, I want
the trunks ready tonight, if possible, so we don’t have
the usual last-minute scramble.”
And in fact, their departure the following morning was
smoother than usual. The Ministry cars glided up to
the front of the Burrow to find them waiting, trunks
packed; Hermione’s cat, Crookshanks, safely enclosed
in his traveling basket; and Hedwig; Ron’s owl,
Pigwidgeon; and Ginny’s new purple Pygmy Puff,
Arnold, in cages. “Au revoir, ’Ariy,” said Fleur throatily, kissing him
good-bye. Ron hurried forward, looking hopeful, but
Ginny stuck out her foot and Ron fell, sprawling in
the dust at Fleur’s feet. Furious, red-faced, and dirt-
spattered, he hurried into the car without saying
good-bye. There was no cheerful Hagrid waiting for them at
King’s Cross Station. Instead, two grim-faced,
bearded Aurors in dark Muggle suits moved forward
the moment the cars stopped and, flanking the party,
marched them into the station without speaking. “Quick, quick, through the barrier,” said Mrs. Weasley, who seemed a little flustered by this austere
efficiency. “Harry had better go first, with — ” She looked inquiringly at one of the Aurors, who
nodded briefly, seized Harry’s upper arm, and
attempted to steer him toward the barrier between
platforms nine and ten. “I can walk, thanks,” said Harry irritably, jerking his
arm out of the Auror’s grip. He pushed his trolley
directly at the solid barrier, ignoring his silent
companion, and found himself, a second later,
standing on platform nine and three-quarters, where
the scarlet Hogwarts Express stood belching steam
over the crowd.
Hermione and the Weasleys joined him within
seconds. Without waiting to consult his grim-faced
Auror, Harry motioned to Ron and Hermione to follow
him up the platform, looking for an empty
compartment. “We can’t, Harry,” said Hermione, looking apologetic.
“Ron and I’ve got to go to the prefects’ carriage first
and then patrol the corridors for a bit.” “Oh yeah, I forgot,” said Harry. “You’d better get straight on the train, all of you,
you’ve only got a few minutes to go,” said Mrs.
Weasley, consulting her watch. “Well, have a lovely
term, Ron. ...” “Mr. Weasley, can I have a quick word?” said Harry,
making up his mind on the spur of the moment. “Of course,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked slightly
surprised, but followed Harry out of earshot of the
others nevertheless. Harry had thought it through carefully and come to
the conclusion that, if he was to tell anyone, Mr.
Weasley was the right person; firstly, because he
worked at the Ministry and was therefore in the best
position to make further investigations, and secondly,
because he thought that there was not too much risk
of Mr. Weasley exploding with anger. He could see Mrs. Weasley and the grim-faced Auror
casting the pair of them suspicious looks as they
moved away. “When we were in Diagon Alley,” Harry began, but Mr.
Weasley forestalled him with a grimace.
“Am I about to discover where you, Ron, and
Hermione disappeared to while you were supposed to
be in the back room of Fred and George’s shop?” “How did you — ?” “Harry, please. You’re talking to the man who raised
Fred and George.” “Er ... yeah, all right, we weren’t in the back room.” “Very well, then, let’s hear the worst.” “Well, we followed Draco Malfoy. We used my
Invisibility Cloak.” “Did you have any particular reason for doing so, or
was it a mere whim?” “Because I thought Malfoy was up to something,” said
Harry, disregarding Mr. Weasley’s look of mingled
exasperation and amusement. “He’d given his mother
the slip and I wanted to know why.” “Of course you did,” said Mr. Weasley, sounding
resigned. “Well? Did you find out why?” “He went into Borgin and Burkes,” said Harry, “and
started bullying the bloke in there, Borgin, to help
him fix something. And he said he wanted Borgin to
keep something else for him. He made it sound like it
was the same kind of thing that needed fixing. Like
they were a pair. And ...” Harry took a deep breath. “There’s something else. We saw Malfoy jump about a
mile when Madam Malkin tried to touch his left arm. I
think he’s been branded with the Dark Mark. I think
he’s replaced his father as a Death Eater.” Mr. Weasley looked taken aback. After a moment he
said, “Harry, I doubt whether You-Know-Who would
allow a sixteen-year-old — ” “Does anyone really know what You-Know-Who would
or wouldn’t do?” asked Harry angrily. “Mr. Weasley,
I’m sorry, but isn’t it worth investigating? If Malfoy
wants something fixing, and he needs to threaten
Borgin to get it done, it’s probably something Dark or
dangerous, isn’t it?” “I doubt it, to be honest, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley
slowly. “You see, when Lucius Malfoy was arrested,
we raided his house. We took away everything that
might have been dangerous.” “I think you missed something,” said Harry
stubbornly. “Well, maybe,” said Mr. Weasley, but Harry could tell
that Mr. Weasley was humoring him. There was a whistle behind them; nearly everyone
had boarded the train and the doors were closing. “You’d better hurry,” said Mr. Weasley, as Mrs.
Weasley cried, “Harry, quickly!” He hurried forward and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley helped
him load his trunk onto the train. “Now, dear, you’re coming to us for Christmas, it’s all
fixed with Dumbledore, so we’ll see you quite soon,”
said Mrs. Weasley through the window, as Harry
slammed the door shut behind him and the train
began to move. “You make sure you look after
yourself and — ” The train was gathering speed. “ — be good and — ” She was jogging to keep up now.
stay safe!” Harry waved until the train had turned a corner and
Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were lost to view, then turned
to see where the others had got to. He supposed Ron
and Hermione were cloistered in the prefects’
carriage, but Ginny was a little way along the
corridor, chatting to some friends. He made his way
toward her, dragging his trunk. People stared shamelessly as he approached. They
even pressed their faces against the windows of their
compartments to get a look at him. He had expected
an upswing in the amount of gaping and gawping he
would have to endure this term after all the “Chosen
One” rumors in the Daily Prophet, but he did not
enjoy the sensation of standing in a very bright
spotlight. He tapped Ginny on the shoulder. “Fancy trying to find a compartment?” “I can’t, Harry, I said I’d meet Dean,” said Ginny
brightly. “See you later.” “Right,” said Harry. He felt a strange twinge of
annoyance as she walked away, her long red hair
dancing behind her; he had become so used to her
presence over the summer that he had almost
forgotten that Ginny did not hang around with him,
Ron, and Hermione while at school. Then he blinked
and looked around: He was surrounded by
mesmerized girls. “Hi, Harry!” said a familiar voice from behind him. “Neville!” said Harry in relief, turning to see a round-
faced boy struggling toward him. “Hello, Harry,” said a girl with long hair and large
misty eyes, who was just behind Neville. “Luna, hi, how are you?” “Very well, thank you,” said Luna. She was clutching
a magazine to her chest; large letters on the front
announced that there was a pair of free Spectrespecs
inside. “Quibbler still going strong, then?” asked Harry, who
felt a certain fondness for the magazine, having given
it an exclusive interview the previous year. “Oh yes, circulation’s well up,” said Luna happily. “Let’s find seats,” said Harry, and the three of them
set off along the train through hordes of silently
staring students. At last they found an empty
compartment, and Harry hurried inside gratefully. “They’re even staring at us!” said Neville, indicating
himself and Luna. “Because we’re with you!” “They’re staring at you because you were at the
Ministry too,” said Harry, as he hoisted his trunk into
the luggage rack. “Our little adventure there was all
over the Daily Prophet, you must’ve seen it.” “Yes, I thought Gran would be angry about all the
publicity,” said Neville, “but she was really pleased.
Says I’m starting to live up to my dad at long last. She
bought me a new wand, look!” He pulled it out and showed it to Harry. “Cherry and unicorn hair,” he said proudly. “We think
it was one of the last Ollivander ever sold, he
vanished next day — oi, come back here, Trevor!” And he dived under the seat to retrieve his toad as it
made one of its frequent bids for freedom. “Are we still doing D.A. meetings this year, Harry?”
asked Luna, who was detaching a pair of psychedelic
spectacles from the middle of The Quibbler. “No point now we’ve got rid of Umbridge, is there?”
said Harry, sitting down. Neville bumped his head
against the seat as he emerged from under it. He
looked most disappointed. “I liked the D.A.! I learned loads with you!” “I enjoyed the meetings too,” said Luna serenely. “It
was like having friends.” This was one of those uncomfortable things Luna
often said and which made Harry feel a squirming
mixture of pity and embarrassment. Before he could
respond, however, there was a disturbance outside
their compartment door; a group of fourth-year girls
was whispering and giggling together on the other
side of the glass. “You ask him!” “No, you!” “I’ll do it!”
And one of them, a bold-looking girl with large dark
eyes, a prominent chin, and long black hair pushed
her way through the door. “Hi, Harry, I’m Romilda, Romilda Vane,” she said
loudly and confidently. “Why don’t you join us in our
compartment? You don’t have to sit with them,” she
added in a stage whisper, indicating Neville’s bottom,
which was sticking out from under the seat again as
he groped around for Trevor, and Luna, who was now
wearing her free Spectrespecs, which gave her the
look of a demented, multicolored owl. “They’re friends of mine,” said Harry coldly. “Oh,” said the girl, looking very surprised. “Oh. Okay.” And she withdrew, sliding the door closed behind her. “People expect you to have cooler friends than us,”
said Luna, once again displaying her knack for
embarrassing honesty. “You are cool,” said Harry shortly. “None of them was
at the Ministry. They didn’t fight with me.” “That’s a very nice thing to say,” beamed Luna. Then
she pushed her Spectrespecs farther up her nose and
settled down to read The Quibbler. “We didn’t face him, though,” said Neville, emerging
from under the seat with fluff and dust in his hair
and a resigned-looking Trevor in his hand. “You did.
You should hear my gran talk about you. ‘That Harry
Potter’s got more backbone than the whole Ministry of
Magic put together*.’ She’d give anything to have you
as a grandson. ...”
Harry laughed uncomfortably and changed the
subject to O.W.L. results as soon as he could. While
Neville recited his grades and wondered aloud
whether he would be allowed to take a
Transfiguration N.E.W.T. with only an “Acceptable,”
Harry watched him without really listening. Neville’s childhood had been blighted by Voldemort
just as much as Harry’s had, but Neville had no idea
how close he had come to having Harry’s destiny. The
prophecy could have referred to either of them, yet,
for his own inscrutable reasons, Voldemort had
chosen to believe that Harry was the one meant. Had Voldemort chosen Neville, it would be Neville
sitting opposite Harry bearing the lightning-shaped
scar and the weight of the prophecy. ... Or would it?
Would Neville’s mother have died to save him, as Lily
had died for Harry? Surely she would. ... But what if
she had been unable to stand between her son and
Voldemort? Would there then have been no “Chosen
One” at all? An empty seat where Neville now sat and
a scarless Harry who would have been kissed good-
bye by his own mother, not Ron’s? “You all right, Harry? You look funny,” said Neville. Harry started. “Sorry — I — ” “Wrackspurt got you?” asked Luna sympathetically,
peering at Harry through her enormous colored
spectacles. “I — what?” “A Wrackspurt ... They’re invisible. They float in
through your ears and make your brain go fuzzy,” she
said. “I thought I felt one zooming around in here.”
She flapped her hands at thin air, as though beating
off large invisible moths. Harry and Neville caught
each other’s eyes and hastily began to talk of
Quidditch. The weather beyond the train windows was as patchy
as it had been all summer; they passed through
stretches of the chilling mist, then out into weak,
clear sunlight. It was during one of the clear spells,
when the sun was visible almost directly overhead,
that Ron and Hermione entered the compartment at
last. “Wish the lunch trolley would hurry up, I’m starving,”
said Ron longingly, slumping into the seat beside
Harry and rubbing his stomach. “Hi, Neville. Hi, Luna. Guess what?” he added, turning to Harry.
“Malfoy’s not doing prefect duty. He’s just sitting in
his compartment with the other Slytherins, we saw
him when we passed.” Harry sat up straight, interested. It was not like
Malfoy to pass up the chance to demonstrate his
power as prefect, which he had happily abused all the
previous year. “What did he do when he saw you?” “The usual,” said Ron indifferently, demonstrating a
rude hand gesture. “Not like him, though, is it? Well
— that is” — he did the hand gesture again — “but
why isn’t he out there bullying first years? “Dunno,” said Harry, but his mind was racing. Didn’t
this look as though Malfoy had more important things
on his mind than bullying younger students?
“Maybe he preferred the Inquisitorial Squad,” said
Hermione. “Maybe being a prefect seems a bit tame
after that.” “I don’t think so,” said Harry. “I think he’s — ” But before he could expound on his theory, the
compartment door slid open again and a breathless
third -year girl stepped inside. “I’m supposed to deliver these to Neville Longbottom
and Harry P-Potter,” she faltered, as her eyes met
Harry’s and she turned scarlet. She was holding out
two scrolls of parchment tied with violet ribbon.
Perplexed, Harry and Neville took the scroll addressed
to each of them and the girl stumbled back out of the
compartment. “What is it?” Ron demanded, as Harry unrolled his.
“An invitation,” said Harry. Harry, I would be delighted if you would join me for a bite of
lunch in compartment C. Sincerely, Professor H. E. F. Slug horn “Who’s Professor Slughorn?” asked Neville, looking
perplexedly at his own invitation. “New teacher,” said Harry. “Well, I suppose we’ll have
to go, won’t we?” “But what does he want me for?” asked Neville
nervously, as though he was expecting detention.
“No idea,” said Harry, which was not entirely true,
though he had no proof yet that his hunch was
correct. “Listen,” he added, seized by a sudden brain
wave, “let’s go under the Invisibility Cloak, then we
might get a good look at Malfoy on the way, see what
he’s up to.” This idea, however, came to nothing: The corridors,
which were packed with people on the lookout for the
lunch trolley, were impossible to negotiate while
wearing the cloak. Harry stowed it regretfully back in
his bag, reflecting that it would have been nice to
wear it just to avoid all the staring, which seemed to
have increased in intensity even since he had last
walked down the train. Every now and then, students
would hurtle out of their compartments to get a better
look at him. The exception was Cho Chang, who
darted into her compartment when she saw Harry
coming. As Harry passed the window, he saw her
deep in determined conversation with her friend
Marietta, who was wearing a very thick layer of
makeup that did not entirely obscure the odd
formation of pimples still etched across her face.
Smirking slightly, Harry pushed on. When they reached compartment C, they saw at once
that they were not Slughorn’s only invitees, although
judging by the enthusiasm of Slughorn’s welcome,
Harry was the most warmly anticipated. “Harry, m’boy!” said Slughorn, jumping up at the
sight of him so that his great velvet-covered belly
seemed to fill all the remaining space in the
compartment. His shiny bald head and great silvery
mustache gleamed as brightly in the sunlight as the
golden buttons on his waistcoat. “Good to see you,
good to see you! And you must be Mr. Longbottom!”
Neville nodded, looking scared. At a gesture from
Slughorn, they sat down opposite each other in the
only two empty seats, which were nearest the door.
Harry glanced around at their fellow guests. He
recognized a Slytherin from their year, a tall black boy
with high cheekbones and long, slanting eyes; there
were also two seventh-year boys Harry did not know
and, squashed in the corner beside Slughorn and
looking as though she was not entirely sure how she
had got there, Ginny. “Now, do you know everyone?” Slughorn asked Harry
and Neville. “Blaise Zabini is in your year, of course — Zabini did not make any sign of recognition or
greeting, nor did Harry or Neville: Gryffindor and
Slytherin students loathed each other on principle. “This is Cormac McLaggen, perhaps you’ve come
across each other — ? No?” McLaggen, a large, wiry-haired youth, raised a hand,
and Harry and Neville nodded back at him. “ — and this is Marcus Belby, I don’t know whether —
?” Belby, who was thin and nervous-looking, gave a
strained smile. “ — and this charming young lady tells me she knows
you!” Slughorn finished. Ginny grimaced at Harry and Neville from behind
Slughorn’s back. “Well now, this is most pleasant,” said Slughorn
cozily. “A chance to get to know you all a little better.
Here, take a napkin. I’ve packed my own lunch; the
trolley, as I remember it, is heavy on licorice wands,
and a poor old man’s digestive system isn’t quite up
to such things. ... Pheasant, Belby?” Belby started and accepted what looked like half a
cold pheasant. “I was just telling young Marcus here that I had the
pleasure of teaching his Uncle Damocles,” Slughorn
told Harry and Neville, now passing around a basket
of rolls. “Outstanding wizard, outstanding, and his
Order of Merlin most well-deserved. Do you see much
of your uncle, Marcus?” Unfortunately, Belby had just taken a large mouthful
of pheasant; in his haste to answer Slughorn he
swallowed too fast, turned purple, and began to
choke. “Anapneo,” said Slughorn calmly, pointing his wand
at Belby, whose airway seemed to clear at once. “Not ... not much of him, no,” gasped Belby, his eyes
streaming. “Well, of course, I daresay he’s busy,” said Slughorn,
looking questioningly at Belby. “I doubt he invented
the Wolfsbane Potion without considerable hard
work!” “I suppose ...” said Belby, who seemed afraid to take
another bite of pheasant until he was sure that
Slughorn had finished with him. “Er ... he and my
dad don’t get on very well, you see, so I don’t really
know much about ...” His voice tailed away as Slughorn gave him a cold
smile and turned to McLaggen instead.
“Now, you, Cormac,” said Slughorn, “I happen to
know you see a lot of your Uncle Tiberius, because he
has a rather splendid picture of the two of you
hunting nogtails in, I think, Norfolk?” “Oh, yeah, that was fun, that was,” said McLaggen.
“We went with Bertie Higgs and Rufus Scrimgeour —
this was before he became Minister, obviously — ” “Ah, you know Bertie and Rufus too?” beamed
Slughorn, now offering around a small tray of pies;
somehow, Belby was missed out. “Now tell me ...” It was as Harry had suspected. Everyone here seemed
to have been invited because they were connected to
somebody well-known or influential — everyone
except Ginny. Zabini, who was interrogated after
McLaggen, turned out to have a famously beautiful
witch for a mother (from what Harry could make out,
she had been married seven times, each of her
husbands dying mysteriously and leaving her mounds
of gold). It was Neville’s turn next: This was a very
uncomfortable ten minutes, for Neville’s parents, well-
known Aurors, had been tortured into insanity by
Bellatrix Lestrange and a couple of Death Eater
cronies. At the end of Neville’s interview, Harry had
the impression that Slughorn was reserving judgment
on Neville, yet to see whether he had any of his
parents’ flair. “And now,” said Slughorn, shifting massively in his
seat with the air of a compere introducing his star
act. “Harry Potter! Where to begin? I feel I barely
scratched the surface when we met over the summer!”
He contemplated Harry for a moment as though he
was a particularly large and succulent piece of
pheasant, then said, “ The Chosen One,’ they’re
calling you now!”
Harry said nothing. Belby, McLaggen, and Zabini
were all staring at him. “Of course,” said Slughorn, watching Harry closely,
“there have been rumors for years. ... I remember
when — well — after that terrible night — Lily —
James — and you survived — and the word was that
you must have powers beyond the ordinary — ” Zabini gave a tiny little cough that was clearly
supposed to indicate amused skepticism. An angry
voice burst out from behind Slughorn. “Yeah, Zabini, because you’re so talented ... at posing. “Oh dear!” chuckled Slughorn comfortably, looking
around at Ginny, who was glaring at Zabini around
Slughorn ’s great belly. “You want to be careful, Blaise!
I saw this young lady perform the most marvelous
Bat-Bogey Hex as I was passing her carriage! I
wouldn’t cross her!” Zabini merely looked contemptuous. “Anyway,” said Slughorn, turning back to Harry. “Such rumors this summer. Of course, one doesn’t
know what to believe, the Prophet has been known to
print inaccuracies, make mistakes — but there seems
little doubt, given the number of witnesses, that there
was quite a disturbance at the Ministry and that you
were there in the thick of it all!” Harry, who could not see any way out of this without
flatly lying, nodded but still said nothing. Slughorn
beamed at him. “So modest, so modest, no wonder Dumbledore is so
fond — you were there, then? But the rest of the
stories — so sensational, of course, one doesn’t know
quite what to believe — this fabled prophecy, for
instance — ” “We never heard a prophecy,” said Neville, turning
geranium pink as he said it. “That’s right,” said Ginny staunchly. “Neville and I
were both there too, and all this ‘Chosen One’ rubbish
is just the Prophet making things up as usual.” “You were both there too, were you?” said Slughorn
with great interest, looking from Ginny to Neville, but
both of them sat clamlike before his encouraging
smile. “Yes . . . well ... it is true that the Prophet often
exaggerates, of course. ...” Slughorn said, sounding a
little disappointed. “I remember dear Gwenog telling
me (Gwenog Jones, I mean, of course, Captain of the
Holyhead Harpies) — ” He meandered off into a long-winded reminiscence,
but Harry had the distinct impression that Slughorn
had not finished with him, and that he had not been
convinced by Neville and Ginny. The afternoon wore on with more anecdotes about
illustrious wizards Slughorn had taught, all of whom
had been delighted to join what he called the “Slug
Club” at Hogwarts. Harry could not wait to leave, but
couldn’t see how to do so politely. Finally the train
emerged from yet another long misty stretch into a
red sunset, and Slughorn looked around, blinking in
the twilight. “Good gracious, it’s getting dark already! I didn’t
notice that they’d lit the lamps! You’d better go and
change into your robes, all of you. McLaggen, you
must drop by and borrow that book on nogtails. Harry, Blaise — any time you’re passing. Same goes
for you, miss,” he twinkled at Ginny. “Well, off you go,
off you go!” As he pushed past Harry into the darkening corridor,
Zabini shot him a filthy look that Harry returned with
interest. He, Ginny, and Neville followed Zabini back
along the train. “I’m glad that’s over,” muttered Neville. “Strange man,
isn’t he?” “Yeah, he is a bit,” said Harry, his eyes on Zabini.
“How come you ended up in there, Ginny?” “He saw me hex Zacharias Smith,” said Ginny. “You
remember that idiot from Hufflepuff who was in the
D.A.? He kept on and on asking about what happened
at the Ministry and in the end he annoyed me so
much I hexed him — when Slughorn came in I
thought I was going to get detention, but he just
thought it was a really good hex and invited me to
lunch! Mad, eh?” “Better reason for inviting someone than because
their mother’s famous,” said Harry, scowling at the
back of Zabini ’s head, “or because their uncle — ” But he broke off. An idea had just occurred to him, a
reckless but potentially wonderful idea. ... In a
minute’s time, Zabini was going to reenter the
Slytherin sixth-year compartment and Malfoy would
be sitting there, thinking himself unheard by anybody
except fellow Slytherins. ... If Harry could only enter,
unseen, behind him, what might he not see or hear?
True, there was little of the journey left — Hogsmeade
Station had to be less than half an hour away,
judging by the wildness of the scenery flashing by the
windows — but nobody else seemed prepared to take
Harry’s suspicions seriously, so it was down to him to
prove them. “I’ll see you two later,” said Harry under his breath,
pulling out his Invisibility Cloak and flinging it over
himself. “But what’re you — ?” asked Neville. “Later!” whispered Harry, darting after Zabini as
quietly as possible, though the rattling of the train
made such caution almost pointless. The corridors were almost completely empty now.
Nearly everyone had returned to their carriages to
change into their school robes and pack up their
possessions. Though he was as close as he could get
to Zabini without touching him, Harry was not quick
enough to slip into the compartment when Zabini
opened the door. Zabini was already sliding it shut
when Harry hastily stuck out his foot to prevent it
closing. “What’s wrong with this thing?” said Zabini angrily as
he smashed the sliding door repeatedly into Harry’s
foot. Harry seized the door and pushed it open, hard;
Zabini, still clinging on to the handle, toppled over
sideways into Gregory Goyle’s lap, and in the ensuing
ruckus, Harry darted into the compartment, leapt
onto Zabini’s temporarily empty seat, and hoisted
himself up into the luggage rack. It was fortunate that
Goyle and Zabini were snarling at each other, drawing
all eyes onto them, for Harry was quite sure his feet
and ankles had been revealed as the cloak had
flapped around them; indeed, for one horrible
moment he thought he saw Malfoy’s eyes follow his
trainer as it whipped upward out of sight. But then
Goyle slammed the door shut and flung Zabini off
him; Zabini collapsed into his own seat looking
ruffled, Vincent Crabbe returned to his comic, and
Malfoy, sniggering, lay back down across two seats
with his head in Pansy Parkinson’s lap. Harry lay
curled uncomfortably under the cloak to ensure that
every inch of him remained hidden, and watched
Pansy stroke the sleek blond hair off Malfoy’s
forehead, smirking as she did so, as though anyone
would have loved to have been in her place. The
lanterns swinging from the carriage ceiling cast a
bright light over the scene: Harry could read every
word of Crabbe’s comic directly below him. “So, Zabini,” said Malfoy, “what did Slughorn want?” “Just trying to make up to well-connected people,”
said Zabini, who was still glowering at Goyle. “Not
that he managed to find many.” This information did not seem to please Malfoy. “Who else had he invited?” he demanded. “McLaggen from Gryffindor,” said Zabini. “Oh yeah, his uncle’s big in the Ministry,” said
Malfoy. “ — someone else called Belby, from Ravenclaw — ” “Not him, he’s a prat!” said Pansy. “ — and Longbottom, Potter, and that Weasley girl,”
finished Zabini. Malfoy sat up very suddenly, knocking Pansy’s hand
aside.
“He invited Longbottom?” “Well, I assume so, as Longbottom was there,” said
Zabini indifferently. “What’s Longbottom got to interest Slughorn?” Zabini shrugged. “Potter, precious Potter, obviously he wanted a look at
‘the Chosen One,’ ” sneered Malfoy, “but that Weasley
girl! What’s so special about her?” “A lot of boys like her,” said Pansy, watching Malfoy
out of the corner of her eyes for his reaction. “Even
you think she’s good-looking, don’t you, Blaise, and
we all know how hard you are to please!” “I wouldn’t touch a filthy little blood traitor like her
whatever she looked like,” said Zabini coldly, and
Pansy looked pleased. Malfoy sank back across her
lap and allowed her to resume the stroking of his
hair. “Well, I pity Slughorn’s taste. Maybe he’s going a bit
senile. Shame, my father always said he was a good
wizard in his day. My father used to be a bit of a
favorite of his. Slughorn probably hasn’t heard I’m on
the train, or — ” “I wouldn’t bank on an invitation,” said Zabini. “He
asked me about Nott’s father when I first arrived. They used to be old friends, apparently, but when he
heard he’d been caught at the Ministry he didn’t look
happy, and Nott didn’t get an invitation, did he? I
don’t think Slughorn’s interested in Death Eaters.” Malfoy looked angry, but forced out a singularly
humorless laugh.
“Well, who cares what he’s interested in? What is he,
when you come down to it? Just some stupid
teacher.” Malfoy yawned ostentatiously. “I mean, I
might not even be at Hogwarts next year, what’s it
matter to me if some fat old has-been likes me or
not?” “What do you mean, you might not be at Hogwarts
next year?” said Pansy indignantly, ceasing grooming
Malfoy at once. “Well, you never know,” said Malfoy with the ghost of
a smirk. “I might have — er — moved on to bigger and
better things.” Crouched in the luggage rack under his cloak, Harry’s
heart began to race. What would Ron and Hermione
say about this? Crabbe and Goyle were gawping at
Malfoy; apparently they had had no inkling of any
plans to move on to bigger and better things. Even
Zabini had allowed a look of curiosity to mar his
haughty features. Pansy resumed the slow stroking of
Malfoy’s hair, looking dumbfounded. “Do you mean — Him?” Malfoy shrugged. “Mother wants me to complete my education, but
personally, I don’t see it as that important these days.
I mean, think about it. ... When the Dark Lord takes
over, is he going to care how many O.W.L.s or
N.E.W.T.s anyone’s got? Of course he isn’t. ... It’ll be
all about the kind of service he received, the level of
devotion he was shown.” “And you think you’ll be able to do something for
him?” asked Zabini scathingly. “Sixteen years old and
not even fully qualified yet?”
“I’ve just said, haven’t I? Maybe he doesn’t care if I’m
qualified. Maybe the job he wants me to do isn’t
something that you need to be qualified for,” said
Malfoy quietly. Crabbe and Goyle were both sitting with their mouths
open like gargoyles. Pansy was gazing down at Malfoy
as though she had never seen anything so awe-
inspiring. “I can see Hogwarts,” said Malfoy, clearly relishing the
effect he had created as he pointed out of the
blackened window. “We’d better get our robes on.” Harry was so busy staring at Malfoy, he did not notice
Goyle reaching up for his trunk; as he swung it down,
it hit Harry hard on the side of the head. He let out an
involuntary gasp of pain, and Malfoy looked up at the
luggage rack, frowning. Harry was not afraid of Malfoy, but he still did not
much like the idea of being discovered hiding under
his Invisibility Cloak by a group of unfriendly
Slytherins. Eyes still watering and head still
throbbing, he drew his wand, careful not to
disarrange the cloak, and waited, breath held. To his
relief, Malfoy seemed to decide that he had imagined
the noise; he pulled on his robes like the others,
locked his trunk, and as the train slowed to a jerky
crawl, fastened a thick new traveling cloak round his
neck. Harry could see the corridors filling up again and
hoped that Hermione and Ron would take his things
out onto the platform for him; he was stuck where he
was until the compartment had quite emptied. At last,
with a final lurch, the train came to a complete halt.
Goyle threw the door open and muscled his way out
into a crowd of second years, punching them aside;
Crabbe and Zabini followed. “You go on,” Malfoy told Pansy, who was waiting for
him with her hand held out as though hoping he
would hold it. “I just want to check something.” Pansy left. Now Harry and Malfoy were alone in the
compartment. People were filing past, descending
onto the dark platform. Malfoy moved over to the
compartment door and let down the blinds, so that
people in the corridor beyond could not peer in. He
then bent down over his trunk and opened it again. Harry peered down over the edge of the luggage rack,
his heart pumping a little faster. What had Malfoy
wanted to hide from Pansy? Was he about to see the
mysterious broken object it was so important to
mend? “Petrificus Totalusl” Without warning, Malfoy pointed his wand at Harry,
who was instantly paralyzed. As though in slow
motion, he toppled out of the luggage rack and fell,
with an agonizing, floor-shaking crash, at Malfoy’s
feet, the Invisibility Cloak trapped beneath him, his
whole body revealed with his legs still curled absurdly
into the cramped kneeling position. He couldn’t move
a muscle; he could only gaze up at Malfoy, who
smiled broadly. “I thought so,” he said jubilantly. “I heard Goyle’s
trunk hit you. And I thought I saw something white
flash through the air after Zabini came back. ...” His eyes lingered for a moment upon Harry’s trainers.
“You didn’t hear anything I care about, Potter. But
while I’ve got you here ...” And he stamped, hard, on Harry’s face. Harry felt his
nose break; blood spurted everywhere. “That’s from my father. Now, let’s see. ...” Malfoy dragged the cloak out from under Harry’s
immobilized body and threw it over him. “I don’t reckon they’ll find you till the train’s back in
London,” he said quietly. “See you around, Potter ...
or not.” And taking care to tread on Harry’s fingers, Malfoy
left the compartment.  SNAPE VICTORIOUS Harry could not move a muscle. He lay there beneath
the Invisibility Cloak feeling the blood from his nose
flow, hot and wet, over his face, listening to the voices
and footsteps in the corridor beyond. His immediate
thought was that someone, surely, would check the
compartments before the train departed again. But at
once came the dispiriting realization that even if
somebody looked into the compartment, he would be
neither seen nor heard. His best hope was that
somebody else would walk in and step on him. Harry had never hated Malfoy more than as he lay
there, like an absurd turtle on its back, blood
dripping sickeningly into his open mouth. What a
stupid situation to have landed himself in . . . and now
the last few footsteps were dying away; everyone was
shuffling along the dark platform outside; he could
hear the scraping of trunks and the loud babble of
talk.  Ron and Hermione would think that he had left the
train without them. Once they arrived at Hogwarts
and took their places in the Great Hall, looked up and
down the Gryffindor table a few times, and finally
realized that he was not there, he, no doubt, would be
halfway back to London. He tried to make a sound, even a grunt, but it was
impossible. Then he remembered that some wizards,
like Dumbledore, could perform spells without
speaking, so he tried to summon his wand, which had
fallen out of his hand, by saying the words “Accio
Wand\” over and over again in his head, but nothing
happened. He thought he could hear the rustling of the trees
that surrounded the lake, and the far-off hoot of an
owl, but no hint of a search being made or even (he
despised himself slightly for hoping it) panicked
voices wondering where Harry Potter had gone. A
feeling of hopelessness spread through him as he
imagined the convoy of thestral-drawn carriages
trundling up to the school and the muffled yells of
laughter issuing from whichever carriage Malfoy was
riding in, where he could be recounting his attack on
Harry to Crabbe, Goyle, Zabini, and Pansy Parkinson. The train lurched, causing Harry to roll over onto his
side. Now he was staring at the dusty underside of
the seats instead of the ceiling. The floor began to
vibrate as the engine roared into life. The Express was
leaving and nobody knew he was still on it. ... Then he felt his Invisibility Cloak fly off him and a
voice overhead said, “Wotcher, Harry.” There was a flash of red light and Harry’s body
unfroze; he was able to push himself into a more
dignified sitting position, hastily wipe the blood off his
bruised face with the back of his hand, and raise his
head to look up at Tonks, who was holding the
Invisibility Cloak she had just pulled away. “We’d better get out of here, quickly,” she said, as the
train windows became obscured with steam and they
began to move out of the station. “Come on, we’ll
jump.” Harry hurried after her into the corridor. She pulled
open the train door and leapt onto the platform,
which seemed to be sliding underneath them as the
train gathered momentum. He followed her, staggered
a little on landing, then straightened up in time to see
the gleaming scarlet steam engine pick up speed,
round the corner, and disappear from view. The cold night air was soothing on his throbbing
nose. Tonks was looking at him; he felt angry and
embarrassed that he had been discovered in such a
ridiculous position. Silently she handed him back the
Invisibility Cloak. “Who did it?” “Draco Malfoy,” said Harry bitterly. “Thanks for ...
well ...” “No problem,” said Tonks, without smiling. From
what Harry could see in the darkness, she was as
mousy-haired and miserable-looking as she had been
when he had met her at the Burrow. “I can fix your
nose if you stand still.” Harry did not think much of this idea; he had been
intending to visit Madam Pomfrey, the matron, in
whom he had a little more confidence when it came to
Healing Spells, but it seemed rude to say this, so he
stayed stock-still and closed his eyes.
“Episkey,” said Tonks. Harry’s nose felt very hot, and then very cold. He
raised a hand and felt it gingerly. It seemed to be
mended. “Thanks a lot!” “You’d better put that cloak back on, and we can walk
up to the school,” said Tonks, still unsmiling. As
Harry swung the cloak back over himself, she waved
her wand; an immense silvery four-legged creature
erupted from it and streaked off into the darkness. “Was that a Patronus?” asked Harry, who had seen
Dumbledore send messages like this. “Yes, I’m sending word to the castle that I’ve got you
or they’ll worry. Come on, we’d better not dawdle.” They set off toward the lane that led to the school. “How did you find me?” “I noticed you hadn’t left the train and I knew you
had that cloak. I thought you might be hiding for
some reason. When I saw the blinds were drawn
down on that compartment I thought I’d check.” “But what are you doing here, anyway?” Harry asked. “I’m stationed in Hogsmeade now, to give the school
extra protection,” said Tonks. “Is it just you who’s stationed up here, or — ?” “No, Proudfoot, Savage, and Dawlish are here too.” “Dawlish, that Auror Dumbledore attacked last year?”
“That’s right.” They trudged up the dark, deserted lane, following the
freshly made carriage tracks. Harry looked sideways
at Tonks under his cloak. Last year she had been
inquisitive (to the point of being a little annoying at
times), she had laughed easily, she had made jokes.
Now she seemed older and much more serious and
purposeful. Was this all the effect of what had
happened at the Ministry? He reflected uncomfortably
that Hermione would have suggested he say
something consoling about Sirius to her, that it
hadn’t been her fault at all, but he couldn’t bring
himself to do it. He was far from blaming her for
Sirius’s death; it was no more her fault than anyone
else’s (and much less than his), but he did not like
talking about Sirius if he could avoid it. And so they
tramped on through the cold night in silence, Tonks ’s
long cloak whispering on the ground behind them. Having always traveled there by carriage, Harry had
never before appreciated just how far Hogwarts was
from Hogsmeade Station. With great relief he finally
saw the tall pillars on either side of the gates, each
topped with a winged boar. He was cold, he was
hungry, and he was quite keen to leave this new,
gloomy Tonks behind. But when he put out a hand to
push open the gates, he found them chained shut. “Alohomora\” he said confidently, pointing his wand at
the padlock, but nothing happened. “That won’t work on these,” said Tonks. “Dumbledore
bewitched them himself.” Harry looked around. “I could climb a wall,” he suggested.
“No, you couldn’t,” said Tonks flatly. “Anti-intruder
jinxes on all of them. Security’s been tightened a
hundredfold this summer.” “Well then,” said Harry, starting to feel annoyed at her
lack of helpfulness, “I suppose I’ll just have to sleep
out here and wait for morning.” “Someone’s coming down for you,” said Tonks. “Look.” A lantern was bobbing at the distant foot of the
castle. Harry was so pleased to see it he felt he could
even endure Filch’s wheezy criticisms of his tardiness
and rants about how his timekeeping would improve
with the regular application of thumbscrews. It was
not until the glowing yellow light was ten feet away
from them, and Harry had pulled off his Invisibility
Cloak so that he could be seen, that he recognized,
with a rush of pure loathing, the uplit hooked nose
and long, black, greasy hair of Severus Snape. “Well, well, well,” sneered Snape, taking out his wand
and tapping the padlock once, so that the chains
snaked backward and the gates creaked open. “Nice
of you to turn up, Potter, although you have evidently
decided that the wearing of school robes would
detract from your appearance.” “I couldn’t change, I didn’t have my — ” Harry began,
but Snape cut across him. “There is no need to wait, Nymphadora, Potter is quite
— ah — safe in my hands.” “I meant Hagrid to get the message,” said Tonks,
frowning. “Hagrid was late for the start-of-term feast, just like
Potter here, so I took it instead. And incidentally,”
said Snape, standing back to allow Harry to pass him,
“I was interested to see your new Patronus.” He shut the gates in her face with a loud clang and
tapped the chains with his wand again, so that they
slithered, clinking, back into place. “I think you were better off with the old one,” said
Snape, the malice in his voice unmistakable. “The
new one looks weak.” As Snape swung the lantern about, Harry saw,
fleetingly, a look of shock and anger on Tonks’s face.
Then she was covered in darkness once more. “Good night,” Harry called to her over his shoulder, as
he began the walk up to the school with Snape.
“Thanks for ... everything.” “See you, Harry.” Snape did not speak for a minute or so. Harry felt as
though his body was generating waves of hatred so
powerful that it seemed incredible that Snape could
not feel them burning him. He had loathed Snape
from their first encounter, but Snape had placed
himself forever and irrevocably beyond the possibility
of Harry’s forgiveness by his attitude toward Sirius.
Whatever Dumbledore said, Harry had had time to
think over the summer, and had concluded that
Snape ’s snide remarks to Sirius about remaining
safely hidden while the rest of the Order of the
Phoenix were off fighting Voldemort had probably
been a powerful factor in Sirius rushing off to the
Ministry the night that he had died. Harry clung to
this notion, because it enabled him to blame Snape,
which felt satisfying, and also because he knew that if
anyone was not sorry that Sirius was dead, it was the
man now striding next to him in the darkness.
“Fifty points from Gryffindor for lateness, I think,”
said Snape. “And, let me see, another twenty for your
Muggle attire. You know, I don’t believe any House
has ever been in negative figures this early in the
term: We haven’t even started pudding. You might
have set a record, Potter.” The fury and hatred bubbling inside Harry seemed to
blaze white-hot, but he would rather have been
immobilized all the way back to London than tell
Snape why he was late. “I suppose you wanted to make an entrance, did
you?” Snape continued. “And with no flying car
available you decided that bursting into the Great
Hall halfway through the feast ought to create a
dramatic effect.” Still Harry remained silent, though he thought his
chest might explode. He knew that Snape had come
to fetch him for this, for the few minutes when he
could needle and torment Harry without anyone else
listening. They reached the castle steps at last and as the great
oaken front doors swung open into the vast flagged
entrance hall, a burst of talk and laughter and of
tinkling plates and glasses greeted them through the
doors standing open into the Great Hall. Harry
wondered whether he could slip his Invisibility Cloak
back on, thereby gaining his seat at the long
Gryffindor table (which, inconveniently, was the
farthest from the entrance hall) without being noticed.
As though he had read Harry’s mind, however, Snape
said, “No cloak. You can walk in so that everyone sees
you, which is what you wanted, I’m sure.” Harry turned on the spot and marched straight
through the open doors: anything to get away from
Snape. The Great Hall, with its four long House tables
and its staff table set at the top of the room, was
decorated as usual with floating candles that made
the plates below glitter and glow. It was all a
shimmering blur to Harry, however, who walked so
fast that he was passing the Hufflepuff table before
people really started to stare, and by the time they
were standing up to get a good look at him, he had
spotted Ron and Hermione, sped along the benches
toward them, and forced his way in between them. “Where’ve you — blimey, what’ve you done to your
face?” said Ron, goggling at him along with everyone
else in the vicinity. “Why, what’s wrong with it?” said Harry, grabbing a
spoon and squinting at his distorted reflection. “You’re covered in blood!” said Hermione. “Come here She raised her wand, said “Tergeol” and siphoned off
the dried blood. “Thanks,” said Harry, feeling his now clean face.
“How’s my nose looking?” “Normal,” said Hermione anxiously. “Why shouldn’t
it? Harry, what happened? We’ve been terrified!” “I’ll tell you later,” said Harry curtly. He was very
conscious that Ginny, Neville, Dean, and Seamus
were listening in; even Nearly Headless Nick, the
Gryffindor ghost, had come floating along the bench
to eavesdrop. “But — ” said Hermione.
“Not now, Hermione,” said Harry, in a darkly
significant voice. He hoped very much that they would
all assume he had been involved in something heroic,
preferably involving a couple of Death Eaters and a
dementor. Of course, Malfoy would spread the story
as far and wide as he could, but there was always a
chance it wouldn’t reach too many Gryffindor ears. He reached across Ron for a couple of chicken legs
and a handful of chips, but before he could take them
they vanished, to be replaced with puddings. “You missed the Sorting, anyway,” said Hermione, as
Ron dived for a large chocolate gateau. “Hat say anything interesting?” asked Harry, taking a
piece of treacle tart. “More of the same, really ... advising us all to unite in
the face of our enemies, you know.” “Dumbledore mentioned Voldemort at all?” “Not yet, but he always saves his proper speech for
after the feast, doesn’t he? It can’t be long now.” “Snape said Hagrid was late for the feast — ” “You’ve seen Snape? How come?” said Ron between
frenzied mouthfuls of gateau. “Bumped into him,” said Harry evasively. “Hagrid was only a few minutes late,” said Hermione.
“Look, he’s waving at you, Harry.” Harry looked up at the staff table and grinned at
Hagrid, who was indeed waving at him. Hagrid had
never quite managed to comport himself with the
dignity of Professor McGonagall, Head of Gryffindor
House, the top of whose head came up to somewhere
between Hagrid’s elbow and shoulder as they were
sitting side by side, and who was looking
disapprovingly at this enthusiastic greeting. Harry
was surprised to see the Divination teacher, Professor
Trelawney, sitting on Hagrid’s other side; she rarely
left her tower room, and he had never seen her at the
start-of-term feast before. She looked as odd as ever,
glittering with beads and trailing shawls, her eyes
magnified to enormous size by her spectacles. Having
always considered her a bit of a fraud, Harry had
been shocked to discover at the end of the previous
term that it had been she who had made the
prediction that caused Lord Voldemort to kill Harry’s
parents and attack Harry himself. The knowledge had
made him even less eager to find himself in her
company, but thankfully, this year he would be
dropping Divination. Her great beaconlike eyes
swiveled in his direction; he hastily looked away
toward the Slytherin table. Draco Malfoy was miming
the shattering of a nose to raucous laughter and
applause. Harry dropped his gaze to his treacle tart,
his insides burning again. What he would not give to
fight Malfoy one-on-one . . . “So what did Professor Slughorn want?” Hermione
asked. “To know what really happened at the Ministry,” said
Harry. “Him and everyone else here,” sniffed Hermione.
“People were interrogating us about it on the train,
weren’t they, Ron?” “Yeah,” said Ron. “All wanting to know if you really
are ‘the Chosen One’ — ”
“There has been much talk on that very subject even
amongst the ghosts,” interrupted Nearly Headless
Nick, inclining his barely connected head toward
Harry so that it wobbled dangerously on its ruff. “I am
considered something of a Potter authority; it is
widely known that we are friendly. I have assured the
spirit community that I will not pester you for
information, however. ‘Harry Potter knows that he
can confide in me with complete confidence/ I told
them. ‘I would rather die than betray his trust.’ ” “That’s not saying much, seeing as you’re already
dead,” Ron observed. “Once again, you show all the sensitivity of a blunt
axe,” said Nearly Headless Nick in affronted tones,
and he rose into the air and glided back toward the
far end of the Gryffindor table just as Dumbledore got
to his feet at the staff table. The talk and laughter
echoing around the Hall died away almost instantly. “The very best of evenings to you!” he said, smiling
broadly, his arms opened wide as though to embrace
the whole room. “What happened to his hand?” gasped Hermione. She was not the only one who had noticed.
Dumbledore ’s right hand was as blackened and dead-
looking as it had been on the night he had come to
fetch Harry from the Dursleys. Whispers swept the
room; Dumbledore, interpreting them correctly,
merely smiled and shook his purple-and-gold sleeve
over his injury. “Nothing to worry about,” he said airily. “Now ... to
our new students, welcome, to our old students,
welcome back! Another year full of magical education
awaits you ...”
“His hand was like that when I saw him over the
summer,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I thought
he’d have cured it by now, though ... or Madam
Pomfrey would’ve done.” “It looks as if it’s died,” said Hermione, with a
nauseated expression. “But there are some injuries
you can’t cure ... old curses ... and there are poisons
without antidotes. ...” "... and Mr. Filch, our caretaker, has asked me to say
that there is a blanket ban on any joke items bought
at the shop called Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes. “Those wishing to play for their House Quidditch
teams should give their names to their Heads of
House as usual. We are also looking for new
Quidditch commentators, who should do likewise. “We are pleased to welcome a new member of staff
this year. Professor Slughorn” — Slughorn stood up,
his bald head gleaming in the candlelight, his big
waistcoated belly casting the table below into shadow
— “is a former colleague of mine who has agreed to
resume his old post of Potions master.” “Potions?” “Potions?” The word echoed all over the Hall as people wondered
whether they had heard right. “Potions?” said Ron and Hermione together, turning
to stare at Harry. “But you said — ” “Professor Snape, meanwhile,” said Dumbledore,
raising his voice so that it carried over all the
muttering, “will be taking over the position of Defense
Against the Dark Arts teacher.” “No!” said Harry, so loudly that many heads turned in
his direction. He did not care; he was staring up at
the staff table, incensed. How could Snape be given
the Defense Against the Dark Arts job after all this
time? Hadn’t it been widely known for years that
Dumbledore did not trust him to do it? “But Harry, you said that Slughorn was going to be
teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts!” said
Hermione. “I thought he was!” said Harry, racking his brains to
remember when Dumbledore had told him this, but
now that he came to think of it, he was unable to
recall Dumbledore ever telling him what Slughorn
would be teaching. Snape, who was sitting on Dumbledore’s right, did
not stand up at the mention of his name; he merely
raised a hand in lazy acknowledgment of the applause
from the Slytherin table, yet Harry was sure he could
detect a look of triumph on the features he loathed so
much. “Well, there’s one good thing,” he said savagely. “Snape ’ll be gone by the end of the year.” “What do you mean?” asked Ron. “That job’s jinxed. No one’s lasted more than a year. ... Quirrell actually died doing it. ... Personally, I’m
going to keep my fingers crossed for another death. “Harry!” said Hermione, shocked and reproachful.
“He might just go back to teaching Potions at the end
of the year,” said Ron reasonably. “That Slughorn
bloke might not want to stay long-term. Moody
didn’t.” Dumbledore cleared his throat. Harry, Ron, and
Hermione were not the only ones who had been
talking; the whole Hall had erupted in a buzz of
conversation at the news that Snape had finally
achieved his heart’s desire. Seemingly oblivious to the
sensational nature of the news he had just imparted,
Dumbledore said nothing more about staff
appointments, but waited a few seconds to ensure
that the silence was absolute before continuing. “Now, as everybody in this Hall knows, Lord
Voldemort and his followers are once more at large
and gaining in strength.” The silence seemed to tauten and strain as
Dumbledore spoke. Harry glanced at Malfoy. Malfoy
was not looking at Dumbledore, but making his fork
hover in midair with his wand, as though he found
the headmaster’s words unworthy of his attention. “I cannot emphasize strongly enough how dangerous
the present situation is, and how much care each of
us at Hogwarts must take to ensure that we remain
safe. The castle’s magical fortifications have been
strengthened over the summer, we are protected in
new and more powerful ways, but we must still guard
scrupulously against carelessness on the part of any
student or member of staff. I urge you, therefore, to
abide by any security restrictions that your teachers
might impose upon you, however irksome you might
find them — in particular, the rule that you are not to
be out of bed after hours. I implore you, should you
notice anything strange or suspicious within or
outside the castle, to report it to a member of staff
immediately. I trust you to conduct yourselves,
always, with the utmost regard for your own and
others’ safety.” Dumbledore’s blue eyes swept over the students
before he smiled once more. “But now, your beds await, as warm and comfortable
as you could possibly wish, and I know that your top
priority is to be well-rested for your lessons tomorrow.
Let us therefore say good night. Pip pip!” With the usual deafening scraping noise, the benches
were moved back and the hundreds of students began
to file out of the Great Hall toward their dormitories.
Harry, who was in no hurry at all to leave with the
gawping crowd, nor to get near enough to Malfoy to
allow him to retell the story of the nose-stamping,
lagged behind, pretending to retie the lace on his
trainer, allowing most of the Gryffindors to draw
ahead of him. Hermione had darted ahead to fulfill
her prefect’s duty of shepherding the first years, but
Ron remained with Harry. “What really happened to your nose?” he asked, once
they were at the very back of the throng pressing out
of the Hall, and out of earshot of anyone else. Harry told him. It was a mark of the strength of their
friendship that Ron did not laugh. “I saw Malfoy miming something to do with a nose,”
he said darkly. “Yeah, well, never mind that,” said Harry bitterly.
“Listen to what he was saying before he found out I
was there. ...”
Harry had expected Ron to be stunned by Malfoy’s
boasts. With what Harry considered pure
pigheadedness, however, Ron was unimpressed. “Come on, Harry, he was just showing off for
Parkinson. ... What kind of mission would You-Know-
Who have given him?” “How d’you know Voldemort doesn’t need someone at
Hogwarts? It wouldn’t be the first — ” “I wish yeh’d stop sayin’ tha’ name, Harry,” said a
reproachful voice behind them. Harry looked over his
shoulder to see Hagrid shaking his head. “Dumbledore uses that name,” said Harry stubbornly. “Yeah, well, tha’s Dumbledore, innit?” said Hagrid
mysteriously. “So how come yeh were late, Harry? I
was worried.” “Got held up on the train,” said Harry. “Why were you
late?” “I was with Grawp,” said Hagrid happily. “Los’ track o’
the time. He’s got a new home up in the mountains
now, Dumbledore fixed it — nice big cave. He’s much
happier than he was in the forest. We were havin’ a
good chat.” “Really?” said Harry, taking care not to catch Ron’s
eye; the last time he had met Hagrid’s half-brother, a
vicious giant with a talent for ripping up trees by the
roots, his vocabulary had comprised five words, two of
which he was unable to pronounce properly. “Oh yeah, he’s really come on,” said Hagrid proudly.
“Yeh’ll be amazed. I’m thinkin’ o’ trainin’ him up as
me assistant.”
Ron snorted loudly, but managed to pass it off as a
violent sneeze. They were now standing beside the
oak front doors. “Anyway, I’ll see yeh tomorrow, firs’ lesson’s straight
after lunch. Come early an’ yeh can say hello ter Buck
— I mean, Witherwings!” Raising an arm in cheery farewell, he headed out of
the front doors into the darkness. Harry and Ron looked at each other. Harry could tell
that Ron was experiencing the same sinking feeling as
himself. “You’re not taking Care of Magical Creatures, are
you?” Ron shook his head. “And you’re not either, are you?” Harry shook his head too. “And Hermione,” said Ron, “she’s not, is she?” Harry shook his head again. Exactly what Hagrid
would say when he realized his three favorite
students had given up his subject, he did not like to
think.
THE HALF-BLOOD PRINCE Harry and Ron met Hermione in the common room
before breakfast next morning. Hoping for some
support for his theory, Harry lost no time in telling
Hermione what he had overheard Malfoy saying on
the Hogwarts Express. “But he was obviously showing off for Parkinson,
wasn’t he?” interjected Ron quickly, before Hermione
could say anything. “Well,” she said uncertainly, “I don’t know. ... It would
be like Malfoy to make himself seem more important
than he is ... but that’s a big lie to tell. ...” “Exactly,” said Harry, but he could not press the
point, because so many people were trying to listen in
to his conversation, not to mention staring at him and
whispering behind their hands. “It’s rude to point,” Ron snapped at a particularly
minuscule first-year boy as they joined the queue to
climb out of the portrait hole. The boy, who had been  muttering something about Harry behind his hand to
his friend, promptly turned scarlet and toppled out of
the hole in alarm. Ron sniggered. “I love being a sixth year. And we’re going to be
getting free time this year. Whole periods when we
can just sit up here and relax.” “We’re going to need that time for studying, Ron!” said
Hermione, as they set off down the corridor. “Yeah, but not today,” said Ron. “Today’s going to be
a real doss, I reckon.” “Hold it!” said Hermione, throwing out an arm and
halting a passing fourth year, who was attempting to
push past her with a lime-green disk clutched tightly
in his hand. “Fanged Frisbees are banned, hand it
over,” she told him sternly. The scowling boy handed
over the snarling Frisbee, ducked under her arm, and
took off after his friends. Ron waited for him to
vanish, then tugged the Frisbee from Hermione ’s grip. “Excellent, I’ve always wanted one of these.” Hermione ’s remonstration was drowned by a loud
giggle; Lavender Brown had apparently found Ron’s
remark highly amusing. She continued to laugh as
she passed them, glancing back at Ron over her
shoulder. Ron looked rather pleased with himself. The ceiling of the Great Hall was serenely blue and
streaked with frail, wispy clouds, just like the squares
of sky visible through the high mullioned windows.
While they tucked into porridge and eggs and bacon,
Harry and Ron told Hermione about their
embarrassing conversation with Hagrid the previous
evening.
“But he can’t really think we’d continue Care of
Magical Creatures!” she said, looking distressed. “I
mean, when has any of us expressed ... you know ...
any enthusiasm?” “That’s it, though, innit?” said Ron, swallowing an
entire fried egg whole. “We were the ones who made
the most effort in classes because we like Hagrid. But
he thinks we liked the stupid subject D’you reckon
anyone’s going to go on to N.E.W.T.?” Neither Harry nor Hermione answered; there was no
need. They knew perfectly well that nobody in their
year would want to continue Care of Magical
Creatures. They avoided Hagrid’s eye and returned
his cheery wave only halfheartedly when he left the
staff table ten minutes later. After they had eaten, they remained in their places,
awaiting Professor McGonagall’s descent from the
staff table. The distribution of class schedules was
more complicated than usual this year, for Professor
McGonagall needed first to confirm that everybody
had achieved the necessary O.W.L. grades to continue
with their chosen N.E.W.T.s. Hermione was immediately cleared to continue with
Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts,
Transfiguration, Herbology, Arithmancy, Ancient
Runes, and Potions, and shot off to a first-period
Ancient Runes class without further ado. Neville took
a little longer to sort out; his round face was anxious
as Professor McGonagall looked down his application
and then consulted his O.W.L. results. “Herbology, fine,” she said. “Professor Sprout will be
delighted to see you back with an ‘Outstanding’ O.W.L. And you qualify for Defense Against the Dark
Arts with ‘Exceeds Expectations.’ But the problem is
Transfiguration. I’m sorry, Longbottom, but an
Acceptable’ really isn’t good enough to continue to
N.E.W.T level. I just don’t think you’d be able to cope
with the coursework.” Neville hung his head. Professor McGonagall peered
at him through her square spectacles. “Why do you want to continue with Transfiguration,
anyway? I’ve never had the impression that you
particularly enjoyed it.” Neville looked miserable and muttered something
about “my grandmother wants.” “Hmph,” snorted Professor McGonagall. “It’s high time
your grandmother learned to be proud of the
grandson she’s got, rather than the one she thinks
she ought to have — particularly after what happened
at the Ministry.” Neville turned very pink and blinked confusedly;
Professor McGonagall had never paid him a
compliment before. “I’m sorry, Longbottom, but I cannot let you into my
N.E.W.T. class. I see that you have an ‘Exceeds
Expectations’ in Charms, however — why not try for a
N.E.W.T. in Charms?” “My grandmother thinks Charms is a soft option,”
mumbled Neville. “Take Charms,” said Professor McGonagall, “and I
shall drop Augusta a line reminding her that just
because she failed her Charms O.W.L., the subject is
not necessarily worthless.” Smiling slightly at the look
of delighted incredulity on Neville’s face, Professor
McGonagall tapped a blank schedule with the tip of
her wand and handed it, now carrying details of his
new classes, to Neville. Professor McGonagall turned next to Parvati Patil,
whose first question was whether Firenze, the
handsome centaur, was still teaching Divination. “He and Professor Trelawney are dividing classes
between them this year,” said Professor McGonagall,
a hint of disapproval in her voice; it was common
knowledge that she despised the subject of
Divination. “The sixth year is being taken by Professor
Trelawney.” Parvati set off for Divination five minutes later looking
slightly crestfallen. “So, Potter, Potter ...” said Professor McGonagall,
consulting her notes as she turned to Harry. “Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts, Herbology,
Transfiguration ... all fine. I must say, I was pleased
with your Transfiguration mark, Potter, very pleased.
Now, why haven’t you applied to continue with
Potions? I thought it was your ambition to become an
Auror?” “It was, but you told me I had to get an ‘Outstanding’
in my O.W.L., Professor.” “And so you did when Professor Snape was teaching
the subject. Professor Slughorn, however, is perfectly
happy to accept N.E.W.T students with ‘Exceeds
Expectations’ at O.W.L. Do you wish to proceed with
Potions?” “Yes,” said Harry, “but I didn’t buy the books or any
ingredients or anything — ”
“I’m sure Professor Slughorn will be able to lend you
some,” said Professor McGonagall. “Very well, Potter,
here is your schedule. Oh, by the way — twenty
hopefuls have already put down their names for the
Gryffindor Quidditch team. I shall pass the list to you
in due course and you can fix up trials at your
leisure.” A few minutes later, Ron was cleared to do the same
subjects as Harry, and the two of them left the table
together. “Look,” said Ron delightedly, gazing at his schedule,
“we’ve got a free period now ... and a free period after
break ... and after lunch ... excellent.” They returned to the common room, which was empty
apart from a half dozen seventh years, including Katie
Bell, the only remaining member of the original
Gryffindor Quidditch team that Harry had joined in
his first year. “I thought you’d get that, well done,” she called over,
pointing at the Captain’s badge on Harry’s chest. “Tell
me when you call trials!” “Don’t be stupid,” said Harry, “you don’t need to try
out, I’ve watched you play for five years. ...” “You mustn’t start off like that,” she said warningly.
“For all you know, there’s someone much better than
me out there. Good teams have been ruined before
now because Captains just kept playing the old faces,
or letting in their friends. ...” Ron looked a little uncomfortable and began playing
with the Fanged Frisbee Hermione had taken from the
fourth-year student. It zoomed around the common
room, snarling and attempting to take bites of the
tapestry. Crookshanks’s yellow eyes followed it and he
hissed when it came too close. An hour later they reluctantly left the sunlit common
room for the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom
four floors below. Hermione was already queuing
outside, carrying an armful of heavy books and
looking put-upon. “We got so much homework for Runes,” she said
anxiously, when Harry and Ron joined her. “A fifteen-
inch essay, two translations, and I’ve got to read
these by Wednesday!” “Shame,” yawned Ron. “You wait,” she said resentfully. “I bet Snape gives us
loads.” The classroom door opened as she spoke, and Snape
stepped into the corridor, his sallow face framed as
ever by two curtains of greasy black hair. Silence fell
over the queue immediately. “Inside,” he said. Harry looked around as they entered. Snape had
imposed his personality upon the room already; it
was gloomier than usual, as curtains had been drawn
over the windows, and was lit by candlelight. New
pictures adorned the walls, many of them showing
people who appeared to be in pain, sporting grisly
injuries or strangely contorted body parts. Nobody
spoke as they settled down, looking around at the
shadowy, gruesome pictures. “I have not asked you to take out your books,” said
Snape, closing the door and moving to face the class
from behind his desk; Hermione hastily dropped her
copy of Confronting the Faceless back into her bag
and stowed it under her chair. “I wish to speak to
you, and I want your fullest attention.” His black eyes roved over their upturned faces,
lingering for a fraction of a second longer on Harry’s
than anyone else’s. “You have had five teachers in this subject so far, I
believe.” You believe ... like you haven’t watched them all come
and go, Snape, hoping you’d be next, thought Harry
scathingly. “Naturally, these teachers will all have had their own
methods and priorities. Given this confusion I am
surprised so many of you scraped an O.W.L. in this
subject. I shall be even more surprised if all of you
manage to keep up with the N.E.W.T. work, which will
be much more advanced.” Snape set off around the edge of the room, speaking
now in a lower voice; the class craned their necks to
keep him in view. “The Dark Arts,” said Snape, “are many, varied, ever-
changing, and eternal. Fighting them is like fighting a
many-headed monster, which, each time a neck is
severed, sprouts a head even fiercer and cleverer than
before. You are fighting that which is unfixed,
mutating, indestructible.” Harry stared at Snape. It was surely one thing to
respect the Dark Arts as a dangerous enemy, another
to speak of them, as Snape was doing, with a loving
caress in his voice?
“Your defenses,” said Snape, a little louder, “must
therefore be as flexible and inventive as the arts you
seek to undo. These pictures” — he indicated a few of
them as he swept past — “give a fair representation of
what happens to those who suffer, for instance, the
Cruciatus Curse” — he waved a hand toward a witch
who was clearly shrieking in agony — “feel the
Dementor’s Kiss” — a wizard lying huddled and
blank-eyed, slumped against a wall — “or provoke the
aggression of the Inferius” — a bloody mass upon the
ground. “Has an Inferius been seen, then?” said Parvati Patil
in a high-pitched voice. “Is it definite, is he using
them?” “The Dark Lord has used Inferi in the past,” said
Snape, “which means you would be well-advised to
assume he might use them again. Now ...” He set off again around the other side of the
classroom toward his desk, and again, they watched
him as he walked, his dark robes billowing behind
him. "... you are, I believe, complete novices in the use of
nonverbal spells. What is the advantage of a
nonverbal spell?” Hermione’s hand shot into the air. Snape took his
time looking around at everybody else, making sure
he had no choice, before saying curtly, “Very well —
Miss Granger?” “Your adversary has no warning about what kind of
magic you’re about to perform,” said Hermione, “which gives you a split-second advantage.”
“An answer copied almost word for word from The
Standard Book of Spells, Grade Six,” said Snape
dismissively (over in the corner, Malfoy sniggered),
“but correct in essentials. Yes, those who progress to
using magic without shouting incantations gain an
element of surprise in their spell-casting. Not all
wizards can do this, of course; it is a question of
concentration and mind power which some” — his
gaze lingered maliciously upon Harry once more —
“lack.” Harry knew Snape was thinking of their disastrous
Occlumency lessons of the previous year. He refused
to drop his gaze, but glowered at Snape until Snape
looked away. “You will now divide,” Snape went on, “into pairs. One
partner will attempt to jinx the other without
speaking. The other will attempt to repel the jinx in
equal silence. Carry on.” Although Snape did not know it, Harry had taught at
least half the class (everyone who had been a member
of the D.A.) how to perform a Shield Charm the
previous year. None of them had ever cast the charm
without speaking, however. A reasonable amount of
cheating ensued; many people were merely
whispering the incantation instead of saying it aloud.
