Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground.
Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy even for a Ranger to
read, but not far from the top a spring crossed the path, and in the wet
earth he saw what he was seeking. 'I read the signs aright,' he said to himself. 'Frodo ran to the
hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by the same way, and
went down the hill again.' Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to
see there something that would guide him in his perplexities; but time was
pressing. Suddenly he leaped forward, and ran to the summit, across the
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked
out. But the sun seemed darkened, and the world dim and remote. He turned
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save the distant hills,
unless it were that far away he could see again a great bird like an eagle
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,
on the west side of the River. He stiffened. There were cries, and among
them, to his horror, he could distinguish the harsh voices of Ores. Then
suddenly with a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the blasts of it
smote the hills and echoed in the hollows, rising in a mighty shout above
the roaring of the falls. 'The horn of Boromir!' he cried. 'He is in need!' He sprang down the
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas ! An ill fate is on me this day,
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?' As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and desperately the
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Ores, and suddenly
the horn-calls ceased. Aragorn raced down the last slope, but before he
could reach the hill's foot, the sounds died away; and as he turned to the
left and ran towards them they retreated, until at last he could hear them
no more. Drawing his bright sword and crying Elendil! Elendil! he crashed
through the trees.
A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake
he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was
resting. But Aragorn saw that he was pierced with many black-feathered
arrows; his sword was still in his hand, but it was broken near the hilt;
his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Ores lay slain, piled all about
him and at his feet. Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. At last slow words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies; twenty at
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Ores have taken them. I
think they are not dead. Ores bound them.' He paused and his eyes closed
wearily. After a moment he spoke again. ’Farewell, Aragorn! Goto Minas Tirith and save my people! I have
failed.' 'No!' said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. 'You have
conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall
not fall!' Boromir smiled. 'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn. But Boromir did not speak again. 'Alas!' said Aragorn. 'Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of the
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all in ruin. It is
I that have failed. Vain was Gandalfs trust in me. What shall I do now?
Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it;
but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How shall I find them and save the
Quest from disaster?' He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from the western
slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as if they were
hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long knife: all his
arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they halted in amazement;
and then they stood a moment with heads bowed in grief, for it seemed to
them plain what had happened. 'Alas!' said Legolas, coming to Aragorn's side. 'We have hunted and
slain many Ores in the woods, but we should have been of more use here. We
came when we heard the horn-but too late, it seems. I fear you have taken
deadly hurt.'
'Boromir is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed, for I was not here
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.' 'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?' 'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told
me that the Ores had bound them; he did not think that they were dead. I
sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam
were with him: not until it was too late. All that I have done today has
gone amiss. What is to be done now?' 'First we must tend the fallen,' said Legolas. 'We cannot leave him
lying like carrion among these foul Ores.' 'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We
must follow the Ores, if there is hope that any of our Company are living
prisoners.' 'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them or not ' said
Aragorn. 'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice
is now before us!' 'Then let us do first what we must do,' said Legolas. 'We have not the
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A
cairn we might build.' 'The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we could
use nearer than the water -side,' said Gimli. 'Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil
creature dishonours his bones.' Quickly they searched the bodies of the Ores, gathering their swords
and cloven helms and shields into a heap. 'See!' cried Aragorn. 'Here we
find tokens!' He picked out from the pile of grim weapons two knives,
leaf-bladed, damasked in gold and red; and searching further he found also
the sheaths, black, set with small red gems. 'No ore-tools these!' he said. 'They were borne by the hobbits. Doubtless the Ores despoiled them, but
feared to keep the knives, knowing them for what they are: work of
Westernesse, wound about with spells for the bane of Mordor. Well, now, if
they still live, our friends are weaponless. I will take these things,
hoping against hope, to give them back.' 'And I,' said Legolas, 'will take all the arrows that I can find, for
my quiver is empty.' He searched in the pile and on the ground about and
found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows
as the Ores were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. And Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here lie many that are
not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty Mountains, if I
know anything of Ores and their kinds. And here are others strange to me.
Their gear is not after the manner of Ores at all!' There were four goblin- soldiers of greater stature, swart, slant-eyed,
with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short broad-bladed
swords, not with the curved scimitars usual with Ores: and they had bows of
yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men. Upon their shields they bore
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on the
front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal. 'I have not seen these tokens before,' said Aragorn. ’What do they
mean?' 'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. That is easy to read.' 'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.' 'Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or
spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does not use white. The Ores in the service
of Barad-dyr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought.
'S is for Saruman, I guess,' he said at length. 'There is evil afoot in
Isengard, and the West is no longer safe. It is as Gandalf feared: by some
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that
he knows of Gandalf s fall. Pursuers from Moria may have escaped the
vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard
by other paths. Ores travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning
news. Do you remember the birds?' 'Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,' said Gimli. 'Let us bear
Boromir away!' 'But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our
course rightly,' answered Aragorn. 'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli. Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they lashed
together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the frame. Upon this
rough bier they carried the body of their companion to the shore, together
with such trophies of his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for Boromir was a
man both tall and strong.
At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier, while Legolas
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a mile or more, and
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the
shore. There is a strange tale to tell!' said Legolas. 'There are only two
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.' 'Have Ores been there?' asked Aragorn. 'We saw no signs of them,' answered Gimli. 'And Ores would have taken
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.' 'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn. Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear him
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head.
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden
belt of Lurien gleamed about his waist. His helm they set beside him, and
across his lap they laid the cloven horn and the hilts and shards of his
sword; beneath his feet they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening
the prow to the stern of the other boat, they drew him out into the water. They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep sides of Tol Brandir
were glowing: it was now mid-afternoon. As they went south the fume of
Rauros rose and shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder
of the falls shook the windless air. Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir lay,
restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the flowing water. The stream
took him while they held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated
by them, and slowly his boat departed, waning to a dark spot against the
golden light; and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros roared on unchanging.
The River had taken Boromir son of Denethor, and he was not seen again in
Minas Tirith, standing as he used to stand upon the White Tower in the
morning. But in Gondor in after-days it long was said that the elven-boat
rode the falls and the foaming pool, and bore him down through Osgiliath,
and past the many mouths of Anduin, out into the Great Sea at night under
the stars. For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing after him. Then Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said,
'but he will not return from mountain or from sea.' Then slowly he began to
sing:
Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows
The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes. 'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight? Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?' 7 saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey; I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away
Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more. The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor. ' 'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, But you came not from the empty lands where no men are. ' Then Legolas sang: From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones;
The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. 'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve. ' 'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie
On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!' 'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth. ' Then Aragorn sang again: From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the roaring falls; And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away. ' 'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought. His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought. His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; And Rauros, golden Rauros-faUs, bore him upon its breast. ' 'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze
To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days. ' So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it with all the
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. 'You left the East Wind to me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of
it.’ ’That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In Minas Tirith they endure
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken
his road, and we must make haste to choose our own.' He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stooping often to
the earth. The Ores have been on this ground,' he said. 'Otherwise nothing
can be made out for certain. All our footprints are here, crossing and
re-crossing. I cannot tell whether any of the hobbits have come back since
the search for Frodo began.' He returned to the bank, close to where the
rill from the spring trickled out into the River. 'There are some clear
prints here,' he said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I
cannot say how long ago.' 'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli. Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the camping-place and
looked at the baggage. 'Two packs are missing.' he said, 'and one is
certainly Sam's: it was rather large and heavy. This then is the answer:
Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with him. Frodo must have
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to
follow me; but plainly he did not do so. He guessed his master s mind and
came back here before Frodo had gone. He did not find it easy to leave Sam
behind!' 'But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?' said Gimli.
'That was a strange deed!' 'And a brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right, I think. Frodo did
not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that overcame his fear
and doubt.' 'Maybe hunting Ores came on him and he fled,' said Legolas. 'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Ores.' What
he thought was the cause of Frodo's sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret. 'Well, so much at least is now clear,' said Legolas: 'Frodo is no
longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat. And Sam
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.' 'Our choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the remaining boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Ores on foot. There is little hope
either way. We have already lost precious hours.' 'Let me think!' said Aragorn. 'And now may I make a right choice and
change the evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I
will follow the Ores,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor
and gone with him to the end; but if I seek him now in the wilderness, I
must abandon the captives to torment and death. My heart speaks clearly at
last: the fate of the Bearer is in my hands no longer. The Company has
played its part. Yet we that remain cannot forsake our companions while we
have strength left. Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared
behind! We will press on by day and dark!' They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid
beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could not carry
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the
Ores. It needed little skill to find. 'No other folk make such a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems their
delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even in their
way.' 'But they go with a great speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they
do not tire. And later we may have to search for our path in hard bare
lands.' 'Well, after them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can go swiftly, and they
do not tire sooner than Ores. But it will be a long chase: they have a long
start.' 'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves. But
come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And
woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We will make such a chase as shall be
accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds p Elves. Dwarves, and Men.
Forth the Three Hunters!' Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led
them, tireless and swift, now that his mind was at last made up. The woods
about the lake they left behind. Long slopes they climbed, dark, hard-edged
against the sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away, grey
shadows in a stony land.
Chapter 2 . The Riders of Rohan Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and brooded
on the pale margins of the Anduin, but the sky was clear. Stars came out. The waxing moon was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks were
black. They had come to the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower,
for the trail was no longer easy to follow. Here the highlands of the Emyn
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of
each ridge was steep and difficult, but the eastward slopes were gentler,
furrowed with many gullies and narrow ravines. All night the three
companions scrambled in this bony land, climbing to the crest of the first
and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley
on the other side. There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the
first light of day had not yet come over the dark hills behind. For the
moment Aragorn was at a loss: the ore -trail had descended into the valley,
but there it had vanished. ’Which way would they turn, do you think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to
take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?' 'They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at" said
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss in Rohan and the power of Saruman
is greatly increased; they will take the shortest way that they can find
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Fet us search northwards!' The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, and a
trickling stream flowed among the boulders at the bottom. A cliff frowned
upon their right; to their left rose grey slopes, dim and shadowy in the
late night. They went on for a mile or more northwards. Aragorn was
searching, bent towards the ground, among the folds and gullies leading up
into the western ridge. Fegolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a
cry and the others came running towards him. 'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said.
'Eook!' He pointed, and they saw that what they had at first taken to be
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled bodies. Five dead Ores
lay there. They had been hewn with many cruel strokes, and two had been
beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood. 'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli. 'But it needs the light of day
and for that we cannot wait.' 'Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,' said Legolas. 'Enemies of the Ores are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell in
these hills?' 'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come here, and it is far from
Minas Tirith. It might be that some company of Men were hunting here for
reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.' 'What do you think?' said Gimli. 'I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,' answered
Aragorn. 'These are Northern Ores from far away. Among the slain are none of
the great Ores with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is
no uncommon thing with these foul folk. Maybe there was some dispute about
the road.' 'Or about the captives,' said Gimli. 'Let us hope that they, too, did
not meet their end here.' Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other traces of
the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning
pale; the stars were fading, and a grey light was slowly growing. A little
further north they came to a fold in which a tiny stream, falling and
winding, had cut a stony path down into the valley. In it some bushes grew,
and there were patches of grass upon its sides. 'At last!' said Aragorn. 'Here are the tracks that we seek! Up this
water -channel: this is the way that the Ores went after their debate.' Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path. As if fresh
from a night's rest they sprang from stone to stone. At last they reached
the crest of the grey hill, and a sudden breeze blew in their hair and
stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn. Turning back they saw across the River the far hills kindled. Day
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose over the shoulders of the
dark land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless and grey;
but even as they looked, the shadows of night melted, the colours of the
waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads of Rohan; the white
mists shimmered in the watervales; and far off to the left, thirty leagues
or more, blue and purple stood the White Mountains, rising into peaks of
jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning. 'Gondor! Gondor!' cried Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on you again in
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams. Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea! West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old. O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold! O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree, Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea? Now let us go!' he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, and
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread. The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply before
their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, there was a wide and rugged
shelf which ended suddenly in the brink of a sheer cliff: the East Wall of
Rohan. So ended the Emyn Muil, and the green plains of the Rohirrim
stretched away before them to the edge of sight. 'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There
is the eagle again! Ele is very high. He seems to be flying now away, from
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!' 'No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He
must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand, if he is the same
bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see something nearer at hand
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!' 'Many things,' said Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot; but I
cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are many
leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the flatness of the plain is hard to
measure.' 'I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us
which way to go,' said Gimli. 'Let us find a path down to the fields as
quick as may be.' 'I doubt if you will find a path quicker than the one that the Ores
chose,' said Aragorn. They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. It seemed
that the Ores had pressed on with all possible speed. Every now and again
the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the
rinds and crusts of hard grey bread, a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed
shoe broken on the stones. The trail led them north along the top of the
escarpment, and at length they came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a
stream that splashed noisily down. In the narrow ravine a rough path
descended like a steep stair into the plain. At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the grass of
Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The
falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water-plants, and
they could hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle slopes
towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away. They seemed to have left winter
clinging to the hills behind. Elere the air was softer and warmer, and
faintly scented, as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing
again in herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath, like one that drinks a
great draught after long thirst in barren places. 'Ah! the green smell!' he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us
run!' 'Light feet may run swiftly here,' said Aragorn. 'More swiftly, maybe,
than iron-shod Ores. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!' They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an
eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west the broad swath of the
marching Ores tramped its ugly slot; the sweet grass of Rohan had been
bruised and blackened as they passed. Presently Aragorn gave a cry and
turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!' He ran quickly to
the right, away from the main trail; for he had seen footprints that went
that way, branching off from the others, the marks of small unshod feet.
These, however, did not go far before they were crossed by ore-prints, also
coming out from the main trail behind and in front, and then they curved
sharply back again and were lost in the trampling. At the furthest point
Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back. 'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain: a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's
I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this ! He held up a thing
that glittered in the sunlight. It looked like the new-opened leaf of a
beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain. 'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together. 'Not idly do the leaves of Lurien fall,' said Aragorn. 'This did not
drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might follow. I
think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.' 'Then he at least was alive,' said Gimli. 'And he had the use of his
wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.'
’Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,' said
Legolas. 'Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young folk driven
like cattle burns my heart.' The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky. Light
clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from
the East. Still the hunters held on. One day now had passed since Boromir
fell, and the Ores were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be
seen in the level plains. As nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the
day's march had they rested for a brief while, and twelve leagues now lay
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn. 'We have come at last to a hard choice,' he said. 'Shall we rest by
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?' 'Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we
stay to sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Ores must pause on the march?'
said Gimli. 'Seldom will Ores journey in the open under the sun. yet these
have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.' 'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli. 'The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my
eyes can see,' said Legolas. 'Maybe, I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold to the
line,' said Aragorn; 'but if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.' 'And there is this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any
tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be carried
off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we might pass the
signs and never know it.' 'That is true,' said Aragorn. 'But if I read the signs back yonder
rightly, the Ores of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company is now
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.' 'Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And
what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs that led you to
the brooch.' 'The Ores will be doubly on their guard since then, and the prisoners
even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will be no escape again, if we do not
contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed, but first we must
overtake them.' 'And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my
folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My
heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner but now I must rest a
little to run the better. And if we rest, then the blind night is the time
to do so.' 'I said that it was a hard choice,' said Aragorn. 'How shall we end
this debate?' 'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You
shall choose.' 'My heart bids me go on,' said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I
will follow your counsel.' 'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed
through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss.' He fell silent gazing
north and west into the gathering night for a long while. 'We will not walk in the dark,' he said at length. 'The peril of
missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me the
greater. If the Moon gave enough light, we would use it, but alas ! he sets
early and is yet young and pale.' 'And tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured. 'Would that the
Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!' 'It will be more needed where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him
lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this
time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no choice of mine can
mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!' He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he had
not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was
in the sky he woke and rose. Gimli was still deep in slumber, but Legolas
was standing, gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as
a young tree in a windless night. 'They are far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in
my heart that they have not rested this night. Only an eagle could overtake
them now.' 'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he
roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.' 'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a hill-top could
not see them till the Sun is up.'
'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon
or sun,' said Legolas. 'Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,' said Aragorn. 'The
land must groan under their hated feet.' He stretched himself upon the
ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay there motionless, for
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again.
Dawn came glimmering, and slowly a grey light grew about them. At last he
rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his
look was troubled. 'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing walks
upon it for many miles about us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies. But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,
even as I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams: horses
galloping, passing in the West. But now they are drawing ever further from
us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!' 'Let us go!' said Legolas. So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long hours of
cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no
weariness could quench the fire that burned them. They seldom spoke. Over
the wide solitude they passed and their elven-cloaks faded against the
background of the grey -green fields; even in the cool sunlight of mid-day
few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they were close at hand.
Often in their hearts they thanked the Lady of Lurien for the gift of
lembas, for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran. All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going north-west
without a break or turn. As once again the day wore to its end they came to
long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low
humpbacked downs ahead. The ore-trail grew fainter as it bent north towards
them, for the ground became harder and the grass shorter. Far away to the
left the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor. No moving
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered that they saw no sign of beast
or man. The dwellings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many leagues
away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now
hidden in mist and cloud; yet the Horse-lords had formerly kept many herds and
studs in the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the
herdsmen had wandered much, living in camp and tent, even in winter-time.
But now all the land was empty, and there was silence that did not seem to
be the quiet of peace. At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they had passed
over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was lost in the
shadows of the East. The young moon was glimmering in a misty sky, but it
gave small light, and the stars were veiled. 'Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said
Legolas. 'The Ores have run before us, as if the very whips of Sauron were
behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and the dark hills,
and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.' Gimli ground his teeth. 'This is a bitter end to our hope and to all
our toil!' he said. 'To hope, maybe, but not to toil,' said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn
back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed back along the way that they had come
towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work
in this land. I distrust the silence. I distrust even the pale Moon. The
stars are faint; and I am weary as I have seldom been before, weary as no
Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends
speed to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is
in the heart more than in the limb.' 'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from
the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away
over the land of Rohan into the darkling West under the sickle moon.
'Saruman!' muttered Aragorn. 'But he shall not turn us back! Halt we must
once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering cloud. But
north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.' As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake!
Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of
the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!' The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the
downs drew near. It was still an hour before noon when they reached them:
green slopes rising to bare ridges that ran in a line straight towards the
North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip
of sunken land, some ten miles wide, lay between them and the river
wandering deep in dim thickets of reed and rush. Just to the West of the
southernmost slope there was a great ring, where the turf had been torn and
beaten by many trampling feet. From it the ore-trail ran out again, turning
north along the dry skirts of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined the
tracks closely. They rested here a while,' he said, 'but even the outward trail is
already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: it is thrice
twelve hours, I guess, since the Ores stood where we now stand. If they held
to their pace, then at sundown yesterday they would reach the borders of
Fangorn.' 'I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist,'
said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?' 'It is still far away,' said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these
downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then north-west to the
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land, another fifteen leagues
it may be.' 'Well, let us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They
would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.' The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the end of the line
of downs. For many hours they had marched without rest. They were going
slowly now, and Gimli' s back was bent. Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour
or journey, but this endless chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind him, grim and silent, stooping now and
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped
as lightly as ever, his feet hardly seeming to press the grass, leaving no
footprints as he passed; but in the waybread of the Elves he found all the
sustenance that he needed, and he could sleep, if sleep it could be called
by Men, resting his mind in the strange paths of elvish dreams, even as he
walked open-eyed in the light of this world. 'Let us go up on to this green hill!' he said. Wearily they followed
him, climbing the long slope, until they came out upon the top. It was a
round hill smooth and bare, standing by itself, the most northerly of the
downs. The sun sank and the shadows of evening fell like a curtain. They
were alone in a grey formless world without mark or measure. Only far away
north-west there was a deeper darkness against the dying light: the
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet. 'Nothing can we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we must
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!' 'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn. 'And ere morning it will be in the East,' said Legolas. 'But rest if
you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown. Rede oft is
found at the rising of the Sun.' 'Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no counsel '
said Gimli. The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept fitfully, and
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to
and fro, singing softly to himself in his own tongue, and as he sang the white
stars opened in the hard black vault above. So the night passed. Together
they watched the dawn grow slowly in the sky, now bare and cloudless, until
at last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. The wind was in the East
and all the mists had rolled away; wide lands lay bleak about them in the
bitter light. Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that
they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-
westward stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy
eaves, and its further slopes faded into the distant blue. Beyond there
glimmered far away, as if floating on a grey cloud, the white head of tall
Methedras, the last peak of the Misty Mountains. Out of the forest the
Entwash flowed to meet them, its stream now swift and narrow, and its banks
deep-cloven. The ore-trail turned from the downs towards it. Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river
back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green, a dark
swift-moving blur. He cast himself upon the ground and listened again
intently. But Legolas stood beside him, shading his bright elven-eyes with
his long slender hand, and he saw not a shadow, nor a blur, but the small
figures of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of
their spears was like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal
sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads. There was a silence in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air
moving in the grass. 'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. 'Many riders on swift
steeds are coming towards us!' 'Yes,' said Legolas, 'there are one hundred and five. Yellow is their
hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.' Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said.
'Nay! The riders are little more than five leagues distant,' said
Legolas. 'Five leagues or one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?' 'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or
at least others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the
ore -trail. We may get new s from them.' 'Or spears,' said Gimli. 'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas. 'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said Aragorn. 'But evil
or good we will await it here.' The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy
mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward slope.
A little above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about
them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy. 'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here
waiting for sudden death?' 'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful,
but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel;
wise but unlearned, writing no books but singing many songs, after the
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know what
has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now be between
the traitor Saruman and the threat of Sauron. They have long been the
friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in
forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of the North,
and their kinship is rather with the Bardings of Dale, and with the
Beornings of the Wood, among whom may still be seen many men tall and
fair, as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Ores.' 'But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor ' said
Gimli. 'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn. 'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.' At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs. The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from the river, and were
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.
Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the fields.
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and the foremost horseman
swerved, passing by the foot of the hill, and leading the host back
southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long
line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon. Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey
coats glistened, their long tails flowed in the wind, their manes were
braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall
and long-limbed; their hair, flaxen-pale, flowed under their light helms,
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In
their hands were tall spears of ash, painted shields were slung at their
backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of mail hung
down upon their knees. In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then one rose in
his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, they appeared not to
perceive the three strangers sitting silently and watching them. The host
had almost passed when suddenly Aragorn stood up, and called in a loud
voice: 'What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?' With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds, wheeled,
and came charging round. Soon the three companions found themselves in a
ring of horsemen moving in a running circle, up the hill-slope behind them
and down, round and round them, and drawing ever inwards. Aragorn stood
silent, and the other two sat without moving, wondering what way things
would turn. Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears
were pointed towards the strangers; and some of the horsemen had bows in
hand, and their arrows were already fitted to the string. Then one rode
forward, a tall man, taller than all the rest; from his helm as a crest a
white horsetail flowed. He advanced until the point of his spear was within
a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir. 'Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?' said the Rider,
using the Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like to the speech
of Boromir, Man of Gondor. 'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am
hunting Ores.' The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to another who rode
up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with
Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not without wonder. At length he spoke
again. 'At first I thought that you yourselves were Ores,' he said; 'but now I
see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Ores, if you go hunting
them in this fashion. They were swift and well-armed, and they were many.
You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them.
But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright
eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That is no name for a Man that you give. And
strange too is your raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you
escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?' 'No,' said Aragorn. 'One only of us is an Elf, Legolas from the
Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have passed through
Lothlurien, and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.' The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his eyes hardened.
'Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Lew
escape her nets, they say. These are strange days ! But if you have her
favour, then you also are net-weavers and sorcerers, maybe.' He turned a
cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli. 'Why do you not speak, silent
ones?' he demanded. Gimli rose and planted his feet firmly apart: his hand gripped the
handle of his axe, and his dark eyes flashed. 'Give me your name,
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said. 'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger
should declare himself first. Yet I am named Jomer son of Jomund, and am
called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.' 'Then Jomer son of Jomund, Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the
Dwarf Gluin's son warn you against foolish words. You speak evil of that
which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and only little wit can
excuse you.' Jomer's eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed
in, advancing their spears. 'I would cut off your head, beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer. 'He stands not alone,' said Legolas, bending his bow and fitting an
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would die before your
stroke fell.'
Jomer raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, but Aragorn
sprang between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon, Jomer!' he cried.
'When you know more you will understand why you have angered my
companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor to any of its folk, neither to man nor to
horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?' 'I will,' said Jomer lowering his blade. 'But wanderers in the
Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt. First
tell me your right name.' 'First tell me whom you serve,' said Aragorn. 'Are you friend or foe of
Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?' 'I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Thjoden King son of Thengel,'
answered Jomer. 'We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far away, but
neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are fleeing from him,
then you had best leave this land. There is trouble now on all our borders,
and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have
lived, keeping our own, and serving no foreign lord, good or evil. We
welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in these times the unbidden
stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve?
At whose command do you hunt Ores in our land?' 'I serve no man,' said Aragorn; 'but the servants of Sauron I pursue
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know
more of Ores; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Ores whom
we pursued took captive two of my friends. In such need a man that has no
horse will go on foot, and he will not ask for leave to follow the trail. Nor will he count the heads of the enemy save with a sword. I am not
weaponless.' Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped
it, and the bright blade of And®ril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it
out. 'Elendil!' he cried. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn and am called
Elessar, the Elfstone, D®nadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor.
Here is the Sword that was Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or
thwart me? Choose swiftly!' Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had
not seen him in this mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while
Jomer had shrunk; and in his living face they caught a brief vision of the
power and majesty of the kings of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes
of Legolas that a white flame flickered on the brows of Aragorn like a
shining crown. Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down his
proud eyes. These are indeed strange days,' he muttered. 'Dreams and
legends spring to life out of the grass. Tell me, lord,' he said, 'what brings you here? And what was the
meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been gone
seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him came back riderless. What
doom do you bring out of the North?' 'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Thjoden son of
Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live
now as they have lived, and few shall keep what they call their own. But of
these great matters we will speak later. If chance allows, I will come
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help, or at least
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an ore-host that carried off our
friends. What can you tell us?' 'That you need not pursue them further,' said Jomer. 'The Ores are
destroyed.' 'And our friends?' 'We found none but Ores.' 'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the slain? Were there no bodies other than those of ore -kind? They would be small. Only
children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.' 'There were no dwarves nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the
slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.' 'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were
hobbits.' 'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.' 'A strange name for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were very
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.' 'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But
they are only a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'
'A man may do both,' said Aragorn. ’For not we but those who come after
will make the legends of our time. The green earth, say you? That is a
mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!' Time is pressing,’ said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. 'We must
hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us
bind them and take them to the king.' 'Peace, Jothain!' said Jomer in his own tongue. 'Leave me a while. Tell
the jored to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade.' Muttering Jothain retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they drew off
and left Jomer alone with the three companions. 'All that you say is strange, Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak the
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are
not easily deceived. But you have not told all. Will you not now speak more
fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?' 'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,'
answered Aragorn. 'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to
go to that city with the son of Denethor, to aid his folk in their war against
Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other business. Of that I
cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.' 'Gandalf !' Jomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but
his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king's favour. He has
been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men, coming as he will,
after a season, or after many years. He is ever the herald of strange
events: a bringer of evil, some now say. 'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted Saruman
our friend, hut Gandalf came then and warned us that sudden war was
preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself had been a prisoner in
Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he begged for help. But Thjoden would
not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in
Thj oden's ears! He is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called
Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief of the Mearas,
which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven nights ago Shadowfax
returned; but the king's anger is not less, for now the horse is wild and
will let no man handle him.'
’Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,' said
Aragorn; 'for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas! Gandalf
will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of Moria and comes
not again.' 'That is heavy tidings,' said Jomer. 'At least to me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.' 'It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand,
though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn.
'But when the great fall, the less must lead. My part it has been to guide
our Company on the long road from Moria. Through Lurien we came — of
which it were well that you should learn the truth ere you speak of it again —
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There
Boromir was slain by the same Ores whom you destroyed.' 'Your news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is this
death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his
praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever in the wars on the
East -borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl than
to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed to me, and likely to prove a great
captain of his people when his time came. But we have had no word of this
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?' 'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered Aragorn, 'and
since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow of Tol
Brandir.' 'On foot?' cried Jomer. 'Yes, even as you see us.' Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of
Arathorn,' he said. 'Wingfoot I name you. This deed of the three friends
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five you have measured ere
the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil! 'But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in haste to
Thjoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we are not yet at
open war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the king's ear,
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall not forsake our old
alliance with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say I and
all who hold with me. The East-mark is my charge, the ward of the Third
Marshal, and I have removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them
beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.' Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli. 'We do not and we never have.' said Jomer with a flash of his eyes;
'though it comes to my ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the
Lord of the Black Land wished to purchase horses of us at great price, but
we refused him. for he puts beasts to evil use. Then he sent plundering
Ores, and they carry off what they can, choosing always the black horses:
few of these are now left. Lor that reason our feud with the Ores is bitter. 'But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He has claimed
lordship over all this land, and there has been war between us for many
months. He has taken Ores into his service, and Wolf-riders, and evil Men,
and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both
east and west. 'It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and
dwimmer -crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they say, as an
old man hooded and cloaked, very like to Gandalf, as many now recall. His
spies slip through every net, and his birds of ill omen are abroad in the
sky. I do not know how it will all end, and my heart misgives me; for it
seems to me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But if you come
to the king's house, you shall see for yourself. Will you not come? Do I
hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?' 'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn. 'Come now!' said Jomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed
to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is battle even now upon the
Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us. 'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my
absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts warned me of the
ore-host coming down out of the East Wall three nights ago, and among them
they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what
I most fear, a league between Orthanc and the Dark Tower, I led forth my
jored , men of my own household; and we overtook the Ores at nightfall two
days ago, near to the borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and
gave battle yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve horses
alas! For the Ores were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined
them, coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to
see a little north of this spot. And others, too, came out of the forest. Great Ores, who also bore the White Hand of Isengard: that kind is stronger
and more fell than all others. 'Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long away. We
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are spare horses as you
see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and we could find a use for
Gimli’s axe and the bow of Legolas, if they will pardon my rash words
concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and
I would gladly learn better.' 'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and my heart desires
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.' 'Hope does not remain,' said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on
the North-borders.' 'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the
East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. But between the
wall and the downs we have found no other trace of them, and no trail has
turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.' 'Then what do you think has become of them?' 'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Ores; but
that you will say cannot be, and I do not fear it. I can only think that
they were carried off into the forest before the battle, even before you
encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such
a way?' 'I would swear that no Ore escaped after we sighted them,' said Jomer. 'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing
broke through our ring, then it was no Ore and had some elvish power.' 'Our friends were attired even as we are,' said Aragorn; 'and you
passed us by under the full light of day.' 'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is hard to be sure of anything
among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in
company walk in our daily fields; and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood
and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long
ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How shall a man
judge what to do in such times?' 'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn. 'Good and ill have not changed
since yesteryear; nor are they one thing among Elves and Dwarves p and
another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden
Wood as in his own house.' 'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the deed which
my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our
law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until the king himself
shall give them leave, and more strict is the command in these days of
peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with me, and you will not.
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.' ’I do not think your law was made for such a chance,’ said Aragorn. 'Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than
once, and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and
in other guise. You I have not seen before, for you are young, but I have
spoken with Jomund your father, and with Thjoden son of Thengel. Never in
former days would any high lord of this land have constrained a man to
abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now,
son of Jomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us, or at the worst let
us go free. Or seek to carry out your law. If you do so there will be fewer
to return to your war or to your king.' Jomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. 'We both have need of
haste,' he said. 'My company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your
hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what is more, I will lend you
horses. This only I ask: when your quest is achieved, or is proved vain,
return with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld, the high house in
Edoras where Thjoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I have not
misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of
your good faith. Do not fail.' 'I will not,' said Aragorn. There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances, among his
men, when Jomer gave orders that the spare horses were to be lent to the
strangers; but only Jothain dared to speak openly. 'It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he
claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a
Dwarf?' 'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great, free or
begrudged.' 'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn. 'Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli, said Legolas. Then all
will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.' A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted it.
'Hasufel is his name,' said Jomer. 'May he bear you well and to better
fortune than Gbrulf, his late master!' A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and fiery, was brought to
Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off saddle and
rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder
Arod was tame and willing beneath him, moving here and there with but a
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts. Gimli was lifted
up behind his friend, and he clung to him, not much more at ease than Sam
Gamgee in a boat. 'Farewell, and may you find what you seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with
what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!' 'I will come,' said Aragorn. 'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter of the Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. ' 'We shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things have chanced that
to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarfs axe
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!' With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When after
a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were already small and far
away. Aragorn did not look back: he was watching the trail as they sped on
their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long
they came to the borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail
of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold. Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leaping back into the
saddle, he rode away for some distance eastward, keeping to one side and
taking care not to override the footprints. Then he again dismounted and
examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot. 'There is little to discover,' he said when he returned. 'The main
trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as they came back;
their outward course must have lain nearer the river. But this eastward
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other
way, back towards Anduin. Now we must ride slower, and make sure that no
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Ores must have been aware
from this point that they were pursued; they may have made some attempt to
get their captives away before they were overtaken.' As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low grey clouds came over
the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever nearer the tree-clad slopes of
Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun went west. They saw no sign of
any trail to right or left, but here and there they passed single Ores,
fallen in their tracks as they ran, with grey -feathered arrows sticking in
back or throat. At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves of the
forest, and in an open glade among the first trees they found the place of
the great burning: the ashes were still hot and smoking. Beside it was a
great pile of helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords, bows and
darts and other gear of war. Upon a stake in the middle was set a great
goblin head; upon its shattered helm the white badge could still be seen.
Further away, not far from the river, where it came streaming out from the
edge of the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was
covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears. Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about the field of
battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By
nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin. 'We can do no more,' said Gimli sadly. 'We have been set many riddles
since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the hardest to unravel. I would
guess that the burned bones of the hobbits are now mingled with the Ores'. It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.' 'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas. 'But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost '
answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.' 'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for
himself or for others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some things that it is
better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall
not depart from this place yet. In any case we must here await the
morning -light.' A little way beyond the battle-field they made their camp under a
spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many broad
brown leaves of a former year, like dry hands with long splayed fingers;
they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze. Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light
a fire,' he said. 'I care no longer for the danger. Let the Ores come as
thick as summer-moths round a candle!' 'If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw them
hither,' said Legolas. 'And it might draw other things, neither Ore nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn. 'We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on
the very edge of Fangorn, and it is perilous to touch the trees of that
wood, it is said.' 'But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,' said Gimli, 'and they felled trees for the fire, as can be seen. Yet they passed the
night after safely here, when their labour was ended.' 'They were many,' said Aragorn, 'and they do not heed the wrath of
Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under the trees. But
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care! Cut no living wood!' 'There is no need,' said Gimli. 'The Riders have left chip and bough
enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel,
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent
with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in
the open, looking towards the profound shadow of the wood, leaning forward,
as one who listens to voices calling from a distance. When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three companions
drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with their hooded
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them. 'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!' It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but
certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be bending this
way and that so as to come above the flames, while the upper branches were
stooping down; the brown leaves now stood out stiff, and rubbed together
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth. There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown forest, so near
at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding presence, full of secret
purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again. 'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you know
why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?' 'I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of asking you what
was the truth of the matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall
a Man answer?' ’You have journeyed further than I,' said Legolas. 'I have heard
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the Onodrim,
that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is old, old even as
the Elves would reckon it.' 'Yes, it is old,' said Aragorn, 'as old as the forest by the
Barrow-downs, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the
last strongholds of the mighty woods of the Elder Days, in which the
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its
own. What it is I do not know.' 'And I do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that dwells in
Fangorn be troubled on my account!' They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the first watch
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold on them.
'Gimli!' said Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous to cut bough or
twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead
wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!' With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his fair
hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending living night and
deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the fire, running
his thumb thoughtfully along the edge of his axe. The tree rustled. There
was no other sound. Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light
stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a great cloak; his
wide-brimmed hat was pulled down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too
amazed for the moment to cry out, though at once the thought flashed into his mind
that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his
sudden movement, sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make, sign. 'Well, father, what can we do for you?' said Aragorn, leaping to his
feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!' He strode forward, but the old
man was gone. There was no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they
did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark. Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. 'The horses! The horses!' The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and disappeared.
For me time the three companions stood still and silent, troubled by this
new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless
leagues lay between them and the Men of Rohan, their only friends in this
wide and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to them that they heard,
far off in the night, the sound of horses whinnying and neighing. Then all
was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind. 'Well, they are gone,' said Aragorn at last. 'We cannot find them or
catch them; so that if they do not return of their own will, we must do
without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.' 'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well as walk on them ' Fie threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it. 'Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan,'
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.' 'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli. 'If you wish to know what I think,' he began again after a while 'I
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the words of Jomer: he walks
about like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were the words. He has gone off
with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble
coming to us, mark my words!' 'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a
hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you guess right, and that we are
in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we
can do but rest, while we may. I will watch for a while now, Gimli. I have
more need of thought than of sleep.' The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed
Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing happened. The old man did
not appear again, and the horses did not return.
Chapter 3 . The Uruk-Hai Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he could hear
his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, calling Frodo, Frodo ! But
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous ore-faces grinned at him out of the
shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from every side. Where
was
Merry? He woke. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his back. Evening
was coming and the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that the
dream was little worse than the waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were
tied with cords. Beside him Merry lay, white-faced, with a dirty rag bound
across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Ores. Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and Merry had run off into the
woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking
no notice of old Strider? They had run a long way shouting— he could not
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed right into
a group of Ores: they were standing listening, and they did not appear to
see Merry and Pippin until they were almost in their arms. Then they yelled
and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the trees. Merry and he had
drawn their swords, but the Ores did not wish to fight, and had tried only
to lay hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several of their arms and
hands. Good old Merry! Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had made them
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled. But they had not gone far on
the way back when they were attacked again, by a hundred Ores at least, some
of them very large, and they shot a rain of arrows: always at Boromir.
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang, and at first the Ores
had been dismayed and had drawn back; but when no answer but the echoes
came, they had attacked more fierce than ever. Pippin did not remember much
more. His last memo was of Boromir leaning against a tree, plucking out an
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if
poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to Boromir? Why didn’t the
Ores kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?' He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and sick. 'I wish
Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,' he thought. ’What good
have I been? Just a nuisance: a passenger, a piece of luggage. And now I
have been stolen and I am just a piece of luggage for the Ores. I hope
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!' He struggled a little, quite uselessly. One of the Ores sitting near
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable tongue. 'Rest
while you can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech,
which he made almost as hideous as his own language. 'Rest while you can!
We'll find a use for your legs before long. You'll wish you had got none
before we get home.' 'If I had my way, you'd wish you were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd
make you squeak, you miserable rat.' He stooped over Pippin bringing his
yellow fangs close to his face. He had a black knife with a long jagged
blade in his hand. 'Lie quiet, or I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. 'Don't draw attention to yourself, or I may forget my orders. Curse the
Isengarders! Ugl®k u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob b®bhosh skai'
he passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into
muttering and snarling. Terrified Pippin lay still, though the pain at his wrists and ankles
was growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back. To take
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that he could hear. There
were many voices round about, and though ore-speech sounded at all times
full of hate and anger, it seemed plain that something like a quarrel had
begun, and was getting hotter. To Pippin's surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible
many of the Ores were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of
two or three quite different tribes were present, and they could not understand
one another's ore-speech. There was an angry debate concerning what they
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the
prisoners.
'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on
this trip.' 'That can't be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill them quick,
kill them now? They're a cursed nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's
coming on, and we ought to get a move on.' 'Orders.' said a third voice in a deep growl. 'Kill all but NOT the
Halfings; they are to be brought back ALIVE as quickly as possible. That's
my orders.' 'What are they wanted for?' asked several voices. 'Why alive? Do they
give good sport?' 'No! I heard that one of them has got something, something that's
wanted for the War, some elvish plot or other. Anyway they'll both be
questioned.' 'Is that all you know? Why don't we search them and find out? We might
find something that we could use ourselves.' 'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a voice, softer than the
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners are NOT to
be searched or plundered: those are my orders.' 'And mine too,' said the deep voice. 'Alive and as captured; no
spoiling. That's my orders.' 'Not our orders!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the
way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go
back north.' 'Then you can wish again,' said the growling voice. 'I am Ugl®k. I
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.' 'Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?' said the evil voice. 'We
should go back at once to Lugb®rz.' 'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.' 'I came across,' said the evil voice. 'A winged Nazgyl awaits us
northward on the east -bank.' 'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get all the
pay and praise in Lugb®rz, and leave us to foot it as best we can through
the Horse-country. No, we must stick together. These lands are dangerous:
full of foul rebels and brigands.' 'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all have run
away. We are the fighting Uruk-hai! We slew the great warrior. We took the
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand
that gives us man’s-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here,
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am UgKDk. I have spoken.' 'You have spoken more than enough, UgKDk,' sneered the evil voice. 'I
wonder how they would like it in Lugb(Drz. They might think that Ugl®k's
shoulders needed relieving of a swollen head. They might ask where his
strange ideas came from. Did they come from Saruman, perhaps? Who does
he think he is, setting up on his own with his filthy white badges? They might
agree with me, with Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I Grishnbkh say
this: Saruman is a fool, and a dirty treacherous fool. But the Great Eye is
on him. 'Swine is it? How do you folk like being called swine by the
muck-rakers of a dirty little wizard? It's ore-flesh they eat, I'll
warrant.' Many loud yells in ore-speech answered him, and the ringing clash of
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would
happen. His guards had gone to join in the fray. In the twilight he saw a
large black Ore, probably Ugl®k, standing facing Grishnbkh, a short
crook -legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the
ground. Round them were many smaller goblins. Pippin supposed that these
were the ones from the North. They had drawn their knives and swords, but
hesitated to attack Ugl®k. Ugl®k shouted, and a number of other Ores of nearly his own size ran
up. Then suddenly, without warning, Ugl®k sprang forwards, and with two
swift strokes swept the heads off two of his opponents. Grishnbkh stepped
aside and vanished into the shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped
backwards and fell over Merry's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and cut down
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged guard. His
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. 'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense!
We go straight west from here, and down the stair. From there straight to
the downs, then along the river to the forest. And we march day and night.
That clear?' 'Now,' thought Pippin, 'if only it takes that ugly fellow a little
while to get his troop under control, I've got a chance.’ A gleam of hope
had come to him. The edge of the black knife had snicked his arm, and then
slid down to his wrist. He felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin. The Ores were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners
were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were
cowed. There was much cursing and confusion. For the moment Pippin was
unwatched. His legs were securely bound, but his arms were only tied about
the wrists, and his hands were in front of him. He could move them both
together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Ore to one
side, then hardly daring to breathe, he drew the knot of the wrist-cord up
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted
it again into a loose bracelet of two loops and slipped it over his hands. Then he lay very still. 'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Ugl®k. 'Don't play any tricks with
them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.' An Ore seized Pippin like a sack, put its head between his tied hands,
grabbed his arms and dragged them down, until Pippin's face was crushed
against its neck; then it jolted off with him. Another treated Merry in the
same way. The Ore's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams. Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night,
but the slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the edge of a
cliff that seemed to look out over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of
water falling nearby. 'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Ore close at hand. 'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k. 'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.' 'Now, I daresay. But how long? You fools! You should have shot him.
He'll raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning.
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.' A shadow bent over Pippin. It was Ugl®k. 'Sit up!' said the Ore. 'My
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you must
use your legs. Be helpful now. No crying out, no trying to escape. We have
ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil your
usefulness for the Master.'
He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him up by his
hair and stood him on his feet. Pippin fell down, and UgKDk dragged him up
by his hair again. Several Ores laughed. UgKDk thrust a flask between his
teeth and poured some burning liquid down his throat: he felt a hot fierce
glow flow through him. The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could
stand. 'Now for the other!' said UgKDk. Pippin saw him go to Merry, who was
lying close by, and kick him. Merry groaned. Seizing him roughly UgKDk
pulled him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then
he smeared the wound with some dark stuff out of a small wooden box. Merry
cried out and struggled wildly. The Ores clapped and hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,' they jeered.
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.' But at the moment UgKDk was not engaged in sport. He needed speed and
had to humour unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in ore-fashion; and
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down
the hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to his feet, Merry
stood up, looking pale but grim and defiant, and very much alive. The gash
in his forehead gave him no more trouble, but he bore a brown scar to the
end of his days. 'Hullo, Pippin!' he said. 'So you've come on this little expedition,
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?' 'Now then!' said UgKDk. 'None of that! Hold your tongues. No talk to
one another. Any trouble will be reported at the other end, and He'll know
how to pay you. You'll get bed and breakfast all right: more than you can
stomach.' The ore -band began to descend a narrow ravine leading down into the
misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separated by a dozen Ores or more,
climbed down with them. At the bottom they stepped on to grass, and the
hearts of the hobbits rose. 'Now straight on!' shouted UgKDk. 'West and a little north. Follow
Lugdush.' 'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners. 'Go on running,' said UgKDk. 'What do you think? Sit on the grass and
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?' 'But we can't run in the sunlight.' 'You'll run with me behind you,' said UgKDk. 'Run! Or you'll never see
your beloved holes again. By the White Hand! What's the use of sending out
mountain-maggots on a trip, only half trained. Run, curse you! Run while
night lasts!' Then the whole company began to run with the long loping strides of
Ores. They kept no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the
line. He wondered how long he would be able to go on at this pace: he had
had no food since the morning. One of his guards had a whip. But at present
the ore-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake. Every now and again there came into his mind unbidden a vision of the
keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. But what could even a Ranger see except a confused trail of ore-feet? His
own little prints and Merry's were overwhelmed by the trampling of the
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. They had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the land sloped
down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist
lay there, pale-glimmering in the last rays of the sickle moon. The dark
shapes of the Ores in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. 'Ai! Steady now!' shouted UgKDk from the rear. A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. He swerved aside to the right, and dived out of the reach of his clutching
guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass. 'Halt!' yelled UgKDk. There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran.
But the Ores were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 'No hope of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope that I have
left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet ground.' He groped with his
two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as
long arms and hard claws seized him. he let it fall. 'There I suppose it
will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't know why I did it. If
the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.' A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. 'Enough!' shouted UgKDk running up. 'He's still got to run a long way
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.' 'But that's not all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. Payment is only put off. Leg it!' Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later part of the
journey. Evil dreams and evil waking were blended into a long tunnel of
misery, with hope growing ever fainter behind. They ran, and they ran,
striving to keep up the pace set by the Ores, licked every now and again
with a cruel thong cunningly handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were
seized and dragged for some distance. The warmth of the ore-draught had gone. Pippin felt cold and sick
again. Suddenly he fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending
nails gripped and lifted him. He was carried like a sack once more, and
darkness grew about him: whether the darkness of another night, or a
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell. Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that many of the
Ores were demanding a halt. UgKDk was shouting. He felt himself flung to the
ground, and he lay as he fell, till black dreams took him. But he did not
long escape from pain; soon the iron grip of merciless hands was on him
again. For a long time he was tossed and shaken, and then slowly the
darkness gave way, and he came back to the waking world and found that it
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass. There he lay for a while, fighting with despair. His head swam, but
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.
An Ore stooped over him, and flung him some bread and a strip of raw dried
flesh. He ate the stale grey bread hungrily, but not the meat. He was
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Ore, the
flesh of he dared not guess what creature. He sat up and looked about. Merry was not far away. They were by the
banks of a swift narrow river. Ahead mountains loomed: a tall peak was
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower
slopes before them. There was much shouting and debating among the Ores; a quarrel seemed
on the point of breaking out again between the Northerners and the
Isengarders. Some were pointing back away south, and some were pointing
eastward. 'Very well,' said UgKDk. 'Leave them to me then! No killing, as I've
told you before; but if you want to throw away what we’ve come all the way
to get, throw it away ! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run! Run! There's the
forest,' he shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your best hope. Off
you go ! And quick, before I knock a few more heads off, to put some sense
into the others.' There was some cursing and scuffling, and then most of the Northerners
broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of them, running wildly along the
river towards the mountains. The hobbits were left with the Isengarders: a
grim dark band, four score at least of large, swart, slant-eyed Ores with
great bows and short broad-bladed swords. A few of the larger and bolder
Northerners remained with them. 'Now we'll deal with Grishnbkh,' said Ugl®k; but some even of his own
followers were looking uneasily southwards. 'I know,' growled Ugl®k. 'The cursed horse-boys have got wind of us. But that' s all your fault, Snaga. You and the other scouts ought to have
your ears cut off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast on horseflesh yet,
or something better.' At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had been pointing
eastward. From that direction there now came hoarse cries, and there was
Grishnbkh again, and at his back a couple of score of others like him:
long-armed crook-legged Ores. They had a red eye painted on their shields.
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought
better of it, eh?' 'I've returned to see that Orders are carried out and the prisoners
safe,' answered Grishnbkh. 'Indeed!' said Ugl®k. 'Waste of effort. Ill see that orders are
carried out in my command. And what else did you come back for? You went
in a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?' 'I left a fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've
come to help them.' 'Splendid!' laughed Ugl®k. 'But unless you've got some guts for
fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road. The
Whiteskins are coming. What's happened to your precious Nazgyl? Has he had another
mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have been
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.' 'Nazgyl, Nazgyl,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You speak of what is
deep beyond the reach of your muddy dreams, Ugl®k,' he said. 'Nazgyl! Ah!
All that they make out! One day you'll wish that you had not said that.
Ape!' he snarled fiercely. 'You ought to know that they're the apple of the
Great Eye. But the winged Nazgyl: not yet, not yet. He won't let them show
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War -and
other purposes.' 'You seem to know a lot,' said Ugl®k. 'More than is good for you, I
guess. Perhaps those in Lugb®rz might wonder how, and why. But in the
meantime the Uruk-hai of Isengard can do the dirty work, as usual. Don't
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging
it to the forest. You'd better follow. You wouldn't get back to the Great
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.' The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung them on their
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh carriers. Either because they were
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders
gradually passed through the Ores of Mordor, and Grishnbkh's folk closed in
behind. Soon they were gaining also on the Northerners ahead. The forest
began to draw nearer. Pippin was bruised and torn, his aching head was grated by the filthy
jowl and hairy ear of the Ore that held him. Immediately in front were bowed
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if
they were made of wire and horn, beating out the nightmare seconds of an
endless time. In the afternoon Ugl®k's troop overtook the Northerners. They were
flagging in the rays of the bright sun, winter sun shining in a pale cool
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out. 'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins will
catch you and eat you. They're coming!' A cry from Grishnbkh showed that this was not mere jest. Horsemen,
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still far behind, but gaining
on the Ores, gaining on them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in
a quicksand. The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that astonished
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed for the end of a race. Then he saw that
the sun was sinking, falling behind the Misty Mountains; shadows reached
over the land. The soldiers of Mordor lifted their heads and also began to
put on speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a few
outlying trees. The land was beginning to slope upwards, ever more steeply;
but the Ores did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh shouted, spurring them
on to a last effort. 'They will make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he
managed to twist his neck, so as to glance back with one eye over his
shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Ores,
galloping over the plain. The sunset gilded their spears and helmets, and
glinted in their pale flowing hair. They were hemming the Ores in,
preventing them from scattering, and driving them along the line of the
river. He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He wished now that
he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in
those days the plans for the journey seemed to be in more competent hands,
and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from Strider,
and even from Frodo. All that he could remember about Rohan was that
Gandalf s horse, Shadowfax, had come from that land. That sounded hopeful,
as far as it went. 'But how will they know that we are not Ores?' he thought. 'I don't
suppose they've ever heard of hobbits down here. I suppose I ought to be
glad that the beastly Ores look like being destroyed, but I would rather be
saved myself.' The chances were that he and Merry would be killed together
with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them. A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at shooting from a
running horse. Riding swiftly into range they shot arrows at the Ores that
straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out
of the range of the answering bows of their enemies, who shot wildly, not
daring to halt. This happened many times, and on one occasion arrows fell
among the Isengarders. One of them, just in front of Pippin, stumbled and
did not get up again. Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Ores had
fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Ores came
to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably no more than
three furlongs away, but they could go no further. The horsemen had
encircled them. A small band disobeyed UgKDk's command, and ran on
towards the forest: only three returned. 'Well, here we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine leadership! I hope the
great Ugl®k will lead us out again.' 'Put those Halflings down!’ ordered Ugl®k, taking no notice of
Grishnbkh. ’You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard over them! They're
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As
long as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and they're not
to be rescued. Bind their legs!' The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly. But Pippin
found that for the first time he was close to Merry. The Ores were making a
great deal of noise, shouting and clashing their weapons, and the hobbits
managed to whisper together for a while. 'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.' 'Lembas!' whispered Pippin. 'Lembas: I've got some. Have you? I don't
think they've taken anything but our swords.' 'Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,' answered Merry, 'but it must be
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!' 'You won't have to. I've—'; but just then a savage kick warned Pippin
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful. The night was cold and still. All round the knoll on which the Ores
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up, golden-red in the darkness, a
complete ring of them. They were within a long bowshot, but the riders did
not show themselves against the light, and the Ores wasted many arrows
shooting at the fires, until Ugl®k stopped them. The riders made no sound.
Later in the night when the moon came out of the mist, then occasionally
they could be seen, shadowy shapes that glinted now and again in the white
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol. 'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing, I should like to know?' 'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind. Meaning
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the other rabble: the
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying to charge with them. They'd
just squeal and bolt, and there are more than enough of these filthy
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from
all I've heard; and don't forget their horses! They can see the
night-breeze, or so it's said. Still there's one thing the fine fellows
don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are in the forest, and they should turn up
any time now.' Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy the Isengarders; but
the other Ores were both dispirited and rebellious. They posted a few
watchers, but most of them lay on the ground, resting in the pleasant
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward
into thick cloud, and Pippin could not see anything a few feet away. The
fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content
merely to wait for the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on
the east side of the knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that
some of the Men had ridden in close, slipped off their horses, crawled to
the edge of the camp and killed several Ores, and then had faded away again.
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede. Pippin and Merry sat up. Their guards, Isengarders, had gone with
Ugl®k. But if the hobbits had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew them close together.
Dimly they were aware of Grishnbkh's great head and hideous face between
them; his foul breath was on their cheeks. He began to paw them and feel
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back. 'Well, my little ones!' said Grishnbkh in a soft whisper. 'Enjoying
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips
on one side, and nasty spears on the other! Little people should not meddle
_in affairs that are too big for them.' His fingers continued to grope. There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. The thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from
the urgent thought of his enemy: 'Grishnbkh knows about the Ring! He's
looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold
fear was in Pippin's heart, yet at the same time he was wondering what use
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire. 'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy
to find.' ' Find it?' said Grishnbkh: his fingers stopped crawling and gripped
Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in
his throat: gollum, go llum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added. The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin
softly. ’That's what he means, is it? O ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little
ones.' ’Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin’s guess. 'Perhaps;
and not only for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,
or not? And what would you give for it?' 'Do I want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if puzzled; but his
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?' 'We mean,' said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, 'that it's no
good groping in the dark. We could save you time and trouble. But you must
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.' 'My dear tender little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have,
and everything you know, will be got out of you in due time: everything!
You'll wish there was more that you could tell to satisfy the Questioner,
indeed you will: quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no! What
do you think you've been kept alive for? My dear little fellows, please
believe me when I say that it was not out of kindness: that's not even one
of UgKDk's faults.' 'I find it quite easy to believe,' said Merry. 'But you haven't got
your prey home yet. And it doesn't seem to be going your way, whatever
happens. If we come to Isengard, it won't be the great Grishnbkh that
benefits: Saruman will take all that he can find. If you want anything for
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.' Grishnbkh began to lose his temper. The name of Saruman seemed
specially to enrage him. Time was passing and the disturbance was dying
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute. 'Have you got it — either of you?' he snarled. 'Gollum, go llum!' said Pippin. 'Untie our legs!' said Merry. They felt the Ore's arms trembling violently. 'Curse you, you filthy
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the bones? Search you! I'll cut
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help of your legs to get you
away-and have you all to myself!' Suddenly he seized them. The strength in his long arms and shoulders
was terrifying. He tucked them one under each armpit, and crushed them
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped over each of their
mouths. Then he sprang forward, stooping low. Quickly and silently he went,
until he came to the edge of the knoll. There, choosing a gap between the
watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the night, down the slope
and away westward towards the river that flowed out of the forest. In that
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire. After going a dozen yards he halted, peering and listening. Nothing
could be seen or heard. He crept slowly on, bent almost double. Then he
squatted and listened again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. At that very moment the dark form of a rider loomed up right in front of
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out. Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat, dragging the hobbits under
him; then he drew his sword. No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather
than allow them to escape or to be rescued; but it was his undoing. The
sword rang faintly, and glinted a little in the light of the fire away to
his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill,
or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dropped the sword and
shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and even as Grishnbkh leaped up
and ran, he was ridden down and a spear passed through him. He gave a
hideous shivering cry and lay still. The hobbits remained flat on the ground, as Grishnbkh had left them.
Another horseman came riding swiftly to his comrade's aid. Whether because
of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse
lifted and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did not see them, lying
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to
move. At last Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So far so good: but how
are we to avoid being spitted?’ The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh had roused
the Ores. From the yells and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits
guessed that their disappearance had been discovered: Ugl®k was probably
knocking off a few more heads. Then suddenly the answering cries of
ore-voices came from the right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and
was attacking the besiegers. There was the sound of galloping horses. The
Riders were drawing in their ring close round the knoll, risking the
ore-arrows, so as to prevent any sortie, while a company rode off to deal
with the newcomers. Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized that without moving
they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape.
'Now,' said Merry, 'if only we had our legs and hands free, we might
get away. But I can’t touch the knots, and I can't bite them.' 'No need to try,' said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed
to free my hands. These loops are only left for show. You'd better have a
bit of lembas first.' He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes
were broken, but good, still in their leaf- wrappings. The hobbits each ate
two or three pieces. The taste brought back to them the memory of fair
faces, and laughter, and wholesome food in quiet days now far away. For a
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless of the cries and
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present. 'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled
forward, and finding the body of the goblin he drew from its sheath a long
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds. 'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be
able to stand again, and walk. But in any case we had better start by
crawling.' They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide berth, and
wormed their way forward bit by bit, until they came to the edge of the
river, gurgling away in the black shadows under its deep banks. Then they
looked back. The sounds had died away. Evidently Mauh®r and his 'lads' had been
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. It would not last very much longer. Already the night was old. In the East,
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale. 'We must get under cover,' said Pippin, 'or we shall be seen. It will
not be any comfort to us, if these riders discover that we are not Ores
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What
about you, Merry?' Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can manage it. Lembas does put heart
into you! A more wholesome sort of feeling, too, than the heat of that
ore-draught. I wonder what it was made of. Better not to know, I expect.
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!' 'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!'
They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river.
Behind them the light grew in the East. As they walked they compared notes,
talking lightly in hobbit-fashion of the things that had happened since
their capture. No listener would have guessed from their words that they had
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment
and death; or that even now, as they knew well, they had little chance of
ever finding friend or safety again. 'You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry. 'You will
get almost a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report
to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and
playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will ever pick up your trail and
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid yours is gone
for good. 'I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with you. Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is where he comes in. I
don't suppose you have much notion where we are; but I spent my time at
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end
of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.' Even as he spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up straight before
them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away
from the coming Dawn. 'Lead on, Master Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.' 'I have not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to me, all
the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.' He led the way in under the huge branches of the trees. Old beyond
guessing, they seemed. Great trailing beards of lichen hung from them,
blowing and swaying in the breeze. Out of the shadows the hobbits peeped,
gazing back down the slope: little furtive figures that in the dim light
looked like elf-children in the deeps of time peering out of the Wild Wood
in wonder at their first Dawn. Far over the Great River, and the Brown Lands, leagues upon grey
leagues away, the Dawn came, red as flame. Loud rang the hunting-horns to
greet it. The Riders of Rohan sprang suddenly to life. Horn answered horn
again. Merry and Pippin heard, clear in the cold air, the neighing of
war-horses, and the sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted,
an arc of fire, above the margin of the world. Then with a great cry the
Riders charged from the East; the red light gleamed on mail and spear. The
Ores yelled and shot all the arrows that remained to them. The hobbits saw
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up the hill and over it, and
wheeled round and charged again. Most of the raiders that were left alive
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the
direction of the forest. Straight up the slope they charged towards the
watchers. Now they were drawing near, and it seemed certain that they would
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and fled deep into the shadows of the
wood. So it was that they did not sec the last stand, when Ugl®k was
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain
at last by Jomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, who dismounted and fought
him sword to sword. And over the wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted
down the few Ores that had escaped and still had strength to fly. Then when they had laid their fallen comrades in a mound and had sung
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their
enemies. So ended the raid, and no news of it came ever back either to
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of the burning rose high to heaven and
was seen by many watchful eyes.
Chapter 4 . Treebeard Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark and tangled
forest allowed, following the line of the running stream, westward and up
towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into Fangorn. Slowly
their fear of the Ores died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling
feeling came over them, as if the air were too thin or too scanty for
breathing. At last Merry halted. 'We can't go on like this,' he panted. 'I want
some air.' 'Let's have a drink at any rate,' said Pippin. 'I'm parched.' He
clambered on to a great tree-root that wound down into the stream, and
stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and cold, and
he took many draughts. Merry followed him. The water refreshed them and
seemed to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of
the stream, dabbling their sore feet and legs, and peering round at the
trees that stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away
into grey twilight in every direction. 'I suppose you haven't lost us already?' said Pippin, leaning back
against a great tree-trunk. 'We can at least follow the course of this
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, and get out again the way we
came.' 'We could, if our legs would do it,' said Merry; 'and if we could
breathe properly.' 'Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,' said Pippin. 'It
reminds me, somehow, of the old room in the Great Place of the Tooks away
back in the Smials at Tuckborough: a huge place, where the furniture has
never been moved or changed for generations. They say the Old Took lived in
it year after year, while he and the room got older and shabbier
together-and it has never changed since he died, a century ago. And Old
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that puts it back a bit. But that
is nothing to the old feeling of this wood. Look at all those weeping,
trailing, beards and whiskers of lichen! And most of the trees seem to be
half covered with ragged dry leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't
imagine what spring would look like here, if it ever comes; still less a
spring-cleaning.'
'But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's description of Mirkwood. That was all
dark and black, and the home of dark black things. This is just dim, and
frightfully tree-ish. You can't imagine animals living here at all, or
staying for long.' 'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying
to get through it either. Nothing to cat for a hundred miles, I should
guess. How are our supplies?' 'Low,' said Merry. 'We ran off with nothing but a couple of spare
packets of lembas, and left everything else behind.' They looked at what
remained of the elven-cakes: broken fragments for about five meagre days,
that was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry. 'We shall be cold
tonight, whichever way we go.' 'Well, we'd better decide on the way now,' said Pippin. 'The morning
must be getting on.' Just then they became aware of a yellow light that had appeared, some
way further on into the wood: shafts of sunlight seemed suddenly to have
pierced the forest -roof. 'Hullo!' said Merry. 'The Sun must have run into a cloud while we've
been under these trees, and now she has run out again; or else she has
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go
and investigate!' They found it was further than they thought. The ground was rising
steeply still, and it was becoming increasingly stony. The light grew
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock -wall before
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of some long root thrust out by
the distant mountains. No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at its foot were stretched out stiff
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where all had looked so shabby
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the
smooth black-greys of bark like polished leather. The boles of the trees glowed
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or a fleeting vision of it
was about them. In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural
perhaps, and made by the weathering and splitting of the rock, for it was
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest-trees, there
was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at
its edge, and one old stump of a tree with only two bent branches left: it
looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man, standing there,
blinking in the morning -light. 'Up we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight
of the land!' They climbed and scrambled up the rock. If the stair had been made it
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were too eager to be
surprised at the remarkable way in which the cuts and sores of their
captivity had healed and their vigour had returned. They came at length to
the edge of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang
up and turned round with their backs to the hill, breathing deep, and
looking out eastward. They saw that they had only come some three or four
miles into the forest: the heads of the trees marched down the slopes
towards the plain. There, near the fringe of the forest, tall spires of
curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them. ’The wind's changing,' said Merry. ’It’s turned east again. It feels
cool up here.' 'Yes,' said Pippin; 'I'm afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it
will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest looked so
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.’ ’Almost felt you liked the Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind
of you,' said a strange voice. 'Turn round and let me have a look at your
faces. I almost feel that I dislike you both, but do not let us be hasty. Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,
and they were twisted round, gently but irresistibly; then two great arms
lifted them up. They found that they were looking at a most extraordinary face. It
belonged to a large Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen
foot high, very sturdy, with a tall head, and hardly any neck. Whether it
was clad in stuff like green and grey bark, or whether that was its hide,
was difficult to say. At any rate the arms, at a short distance from the
trunk, were not wrinkled, but covered with a brown smooth skin. The large
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a
sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy at the roots, thin and mossy at
the ends. But at the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes. These
deep eyes were now surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating.
They were brown, shot with a green light. Often afterwards Pippin tried to
describe his first impression of them. 'One felt as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with
ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking; but their surface was
sparkling with the present: like sun shimmering on the outer leaves of a
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake. I don’t know but it felt
as if something that grew in the ground-asleep, you might say, or just
feeling itself as something between roof-tip and leaf-tip, between deep
earth and sky had suddenly waked up, and was considering you with the same
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.' 'Hrum, Hoorn,' murmured the voice, a deep voice like a very deep
woodwind instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do not be hasty, that is my motto.
But if I had seen you, before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot remember— if I had seen you
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little
Ores, and found out my mistake afterwards. Very odd you are, indeed. Root
and twig, very odd!' Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he
felt a curious suspense, but not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And
what are you?' A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells
were covered over. 'Hrum, now,' answered the voice; 'well, I am an Ent, or
that's what they call me. Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am, you might
say, in your manner of speaking. Fangorn is my name according to some,
Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.' 'An EntT said Merry. 'What's that? But what do you call yourself? What's your real name?' 'Hoo now!' replied Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be telling! Not so
hasty. And / am doing the asking. You are in my country. What are you, I
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not seem to come in the old lists that I
learned when I was young. But that was a long, long time ago, and they may
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! Plow did it go? Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! First name the four, the free peoples: Eldest of all, the elf-children; Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;
Man the mortal, master of horses: Hm, hm, hm. Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter; Hound is hungry, hare is fearful... hm, hm. Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest Swan the whitest, serpent coldest... Hoorn, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room turn, room turn, roomty toom
turn. It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!' 'We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old
stories,' said Merry. 'Yet we've been about for quite a long time. We're
hobbits' 'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin. ’Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers. Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got
it.' 'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard. 'That would do. So you live in
holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. Who calls you hobbits, though?
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all the old words: they began
it.' 'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin. 'Hoom, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call yourselves hobbits? But
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right
names if you're not careful.' 'We aren't careful about that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a
Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.' 'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took, but I'm generally called Pippin, or
even Pip.' 'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I am honoured by
your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once. There are Ents
and Ents, you know; or there are Ents and things that look like Ents but
ain't, as you might say. I'll call you Merry and Pippin if you please-nice
names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer
half-knowing, half-humorous look came with a green flicker into his eyes.
’For one thing it would take a long while: my name is growing all the time,
and I've lived a very long, long time; so my name is like a story. Real
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the
Old Entish as you might say. It is a lovely language, but it takes a very
long time to say anything in it, because we do not say anything in it.
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to. 'But now,' and the eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is going on? What are you doing in it
all? I can see and hear ( and smell and feel) a great deal from this, from
this, from this a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml. Excuse me: that
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what the word is in the outside
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine
mornings, and think about the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood, and the
horses, and the clouds, and the unfolding of the world. What is going on?
What is Gandalf up to? And these — burbrum,' he made a deep rumbling noise
like a discord on a great organ — 'these Ores, and young Saruman down at
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.' 'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry: 'and even if we tried to
be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to be
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we
asked what you are going to do with us, and which side you are on? And did
you know Gandalf?' 'Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about trees '
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?' 'Yes,' said Pippin sadly, 'we did. He was a great friend, and he was
our guide.' 'Then I can answer your other questions,' said Treebeard. 'I am not
going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that 'do something to you'
without your leave. We might do some things together. I don't know about
sides. I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But
you speak of Master Gandalf, as if he was in a story that had come to an
end.' 'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.' 'Hoo, come now!' said Treebeard. 'Hoorn, hm, ah well.' He paused,
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoorn, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come
now!'
'If you would like to hear more, said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us down? Couldn't we sit here
together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us
up.' 'Hm, tiredl No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not
sit down. I am not very, hm, bendable. But there, the Sun is going in. Let
us leave this — did you say what you call it?' 'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry. Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But
it is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever since this part of
the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.' 'Where shall we go?' asked Merry. 'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard. 'Is it far?' 'I do not know. You might call it far, perhaps. But what does that
matter?' 'Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have
only a little food.' 'O! Hm! You need not trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give
you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And
if we decide to part company, I can set you down outside my country at any
point you choose. Let us go!' Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one in the crook of each arm,
Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the other, and moved them
to the edge of the shelf. The rootlike toes grasped the rocks. Then
carefully and solemnly, he stalked down from step to step, and reached the
floor of the Forest. At once he set off with long deliberate strides through the trees,
deeper and deeper into the wood, never far from the stream, climbing
steadily up towards the slopes of the mountains. Many of the trees seemed
asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;
but some quivered, and some raised up their branches above his head as he
approached. All the while, as he walked, he talked to himself in a long
running stream of musical sounds. The hobbits were silent for some time. They felt, oddly enough, safe
and comfortable, and they had a great deal to think and wonder about. At
last Pippin ventured to speak again.
’Please, Treebeard,' he said, ’could I ask you something? Why did
Celeborn warn us against your forest? He told us not to risk getting
entangled in it.' ’Hmm, did he now?' rumbled Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the
same, if you had been going the other way. Do not risk getting entangled in
the woods of Laurelindurenan ! That is what the Elves used to call it, but
now they make the name shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are
right: maybe it is fading; not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold,
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is
a queer place, and not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land. 'And so is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to
grief. Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin ,' he hummed to
himself. 'They are falling rather behind the world in there, I guess,' he
said 'Neither this country, nor anything else outside the Golden Wood, is
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still: Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor, 1 that is what they used to say. Things have changed, but it is still
true in places.' 'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?' 'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that
goes on myself, so I cannot explain it to you. Some of us are still true
Ents, and lively enough in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are just trees, of course; but
many are half awake. Some are quite wide awake, and a few are, well, ah,
well getting Entish. That is going on all the time. 'When that happens to a tree, you find that some have bad hearts.
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old
willows down the Ent wash, gone long ago, alas! They were quite hollow,
indeed they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and sweet-spoken as a
young leaf. And then there are some trees in the valleys under the
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through. That sort of thing seems
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There
are still some very black patches.' 'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry. 'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some
shadow of the Great Darkness lying there still away north; and bad memories
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the Darkness
has never been lifted, and the trees are older than I am. Still, we do what
we can. We keep off strangers and the foolhardy; and we train and we teach,
we walk and we weed. 'We are tree-herds, we old Ents. Few enough of us are left now. Sheep
get like shepherd, and shepherds like sheep, it is said; but slowly, and
neither have long in the world. It is quicker and closer with trees and
Ents, and they walk down the ages together. For Ents are more like Elves:
less interested in themselves than Men are, and better at getting inside
other things. And yet again Ents are more like Men, more changeable than
Elves are, and quicker at taking the colour of the outside, you might say. Or better than both: for they are steadier and keep their minds on things
longer. 'Some of my kin look just like trees now, and need something great
to rouse them; and they speak only in whispers. But some of my trees are
limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees
up and teaching them to speak and learning their tree-talk. They always
wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness
came, and they passed away over the Sea, or fled into far valleys, and hid
themselves, and made songs about days that would never come again. Never
again. Aye, aye, there was all one wood once upon a time: from here to the
Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End. 'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing all day
and hear no more than the echo of my own voice in the hollow hills. The
woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.' Treebeard fell silent, striding along, and yet making hardly a sound
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them: In the willow-meads ofTasarinan I walked in the Spring. Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! And I said that was good. I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! And I thought that was best. To the beeches ofNeldorethlcame in the Autumn. Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in
Taur-na-neldor! It was more than my desire. To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the
Winter. Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon
Orod-na-Thfn! My voice went up and sang in the sky. And now all those lands lie under the wave. And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml. In my own land, in the country of F angorn, Where the roots are long, And the years lie thicker than the leaves In Tauremornaluml. He ended, and strode on silently, and in all the wood, as far as ear
could reach, there was not a sound. The day waned, and dusk was twined about the boles of the trees. At
last the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.
Down the hillside the young Entwash, leaping from its springs high above,
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there
was a long slope, clad with grass, now grey in the twilight. No trees grew
there and it was open to the sky; stars were shining already in lakes
between shores of cloud. Treebeard strode up the slope, hardly slackening his pace. Suddenly
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one
on either side, like living gate-posts; but there was no gate save their
crossing and interwoven boughs. As the old Ent approached, the trees lifted
up their branches, and all their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great
hall had been cut in the side of the hill. On either hand the walls sloped
upwards, until they were fifty feet high or more, and along each wall stood
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards. At the far end the rock-wall was sheer, but at the bottom it had been
hollowed back into a shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of the
hall, save the branches of the trees, which at the inner end overshadowed
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream
escaped from the springs above, and leaving the main water, fell tinkling
down the sheer face of the wall, pouring in silver drops, like a fine
curtain in front of the arched bay. The water was gathered again into a
stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed
away beside the open path, out to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through
the forest. 'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his long silence. 'I have
brought you about seventy thousand ent-strides, but what that comes to in
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots of
the Last Mountain. Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He
set them down on the grass between the aisles of the trees, and they
followed him towards the great arch. The hobbits now noticed that as he
walked his knees hardly bent, but his legs opened in a great stride. He
planted his big toes (and they were indeed big, and very broad) on the
ground first, before any other part of his feet. For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling spring, and
took a deep breath; then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table
stood there, but no chairs. At the back of the bay it was already quite
dark. Treebeard lifted two great vessels and stood them on the table. They
seemed to be filled with water; but he held his hands over them, and
immediately they began to glow, one with a golden and the other with a rich
green light; and the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as if the sun
of summer was shining through a roof of young leaves. Looking back, the
hobbits saw that the trees in the court had also begun to glow, faintly at
first, but steadily quickening, until every leaf was edged with light: some
green, some gold, some red as copper; while the tree-trunks looked like
pillars moulded out of luminous stone. 'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the back of the
bay, and then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy
lids. He removed one of the lids, and dipped in a great ladle, and with it
filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones. 'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I fear. But
you may sit on the table.' Picking up the hobbits he set them on the great
stone slab, six feet above the ground, and there they sat dangling their
legs, and drinking in sips.
The drink was like water, indeed very like the taste of the draughts
they had drunk from the Entwash near, the borders of the forest, and yet
there was some scent or savour in it which they could not describe: it was
faint, but it reminded them of the smell of a distant wood borne from afar
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the draught began at the toes, and
rose steadily through every limb, bringing refreshment and vigour as it
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that
the hair on their heads was actually standing up, waving and curling and
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet in the basin beyond the
arch, and then he drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow draught.
The hobbits thought he would never stop. At last he set the bowl down again. 'Ah — ah,' he sighed. 'Hm, hoom,
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and I will lie down; that
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.' On the right side of the bay there was a great bed on low legs; not
more than a couple of feet high, covered deep in dried grass and bracken.
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of
bending at his middle), until he lay at full length, with his arms behind
his head, looking up at the ceiling, upon which lights were flickering, like
the play of leaves in the sunshine. Merry and Pippin sat beside him on
pillows of grass. 'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard. The hobbits began to tell him the story of their adventures ever since
they left Hobbiton. They followed no very clear order, for they interrupted
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the speaker, and went
back to some earlier point, or jumped forward asking questions about later
events. They said nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why
they set out or where they were going to; and he did not ask for any
reasons. He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders, in
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of
Moria, and in Lothlurien and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and
its country over and over again. He said an odd thing at this point. 'You
never see any, hm, any Ents round there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,
Entwives I should really say.' EntwivesT said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?' Yes, hm, well no: I do not really know now, said Treebeard
thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.' Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that
concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman's doings. The
hobbits regretted very much that they knew so little about them: only a
rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the Council. But they
were clear at any rate that UgKDk and his troop came from Isengard, and
spoke of Saruman as their master. 'Hm, hoom!' said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound and
wandered down to the battle of the Ores and the Riders of Rohan. 'Well,
well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me all, no
indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you are doing as Gandalf
would wish. There is something very big going on, that I can see, and what
it is maybe I shall learn in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig,
but it is a strange business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the
old lists, and behold the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and
Gandalf takes them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras
Galadhon, and Ores pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland: indeed
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!' 'And what about yourself?' asked Merry. 'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars,' said Treebeard;
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards
are always troubled about the future. I do not like worrying about the
future. I am not altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether
on my side, if you understand me: nobody cares for the woods as I care for
them, not even Elves nowadays. Still, I take more kindly to Elves than to
others: it was the Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago, and that was a
great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our ways have parted since. And
there are some things, of course, whose side I am altogether not on; I am
against them altogether: these — burbrum' (he again made a deep rumble of
disgust)' — these Ores, and their masters. 'I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when it
removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor is a long way away.
But it seems that the wind is setting East, and the withering of all woods
may be drawing near. There is naught that an old Ent can do to hold back
that storm: he must weather it or crack. 'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about
Saruman.' ’Who is Saruman?' asked Pippin. 'Do you know anything about his
history?' 'Saruman is a Wizard,' answered Treebeard. 'More than that I
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They appeared first after
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with the Ships I never
can tell. Saruman was reckoned great among them. I believe. He gave up
wandering about and minding the affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago —
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or
Isengard as the Men of Rohan call it. He was very quiet to begin with, but
his fame began to grow. He was chosen to be head of the White Council, they
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now if even then Saruman
was not turning to evil ways. But at any rate he used to give no trouble to
his neighbours. I used to talk to him. There was a time when he was always
walking about my woods. He was polite in those days, always asking my leave
(at least when he met me); and always eager to listen. I told him many
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me
in like kind. I cannot remember that he ever told, me anything. And he got
more and more like that; his face, as I remember it-I have not seen it for
many a day-became like windows in a stone wall: windows with shutters
inside. 'I think that I now understand what he is up to. He is plotting to
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels; and he does not care for
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the moment. And now it
is clear that he is a black traitor. He has taken up with foul folk, with
the Ores. Brm, hoom! Worse than that: he has been doing something to them;
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a
mark of evil things that came in the Great Darkness that they cannot abide
the Sun; but Saruman's Ores can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of
Ores and Men? That would be a black evil!' Treebeard rumbled for a moment, as if he were pronouncing some deep,
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some time ago I began to wonder how Ores
dared to pass through my woods so freely,' he went on. 'Only lately did I
guess that Saruman was to blame, and that long ago he had been spying out
all the ways, and discovering my secrets. He and his foul folk are making
havoc now. Down on the borders they are felling trees-good trees. Some of
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot — ore-mischief that; but most
are hewn up and carried off to feed the fires of Orthanc. There is always a
smoke rising from Isengard these days. 'Curse him, root and branch! Many of those trees were my friends
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their own that
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump and bramble where once
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must
stop!' Treebeard raised himself from his bed with a jerk, stood up, and
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two
jets of flame. There was a flicker like green fire in his eyes, and his
beard stood out stiff as a great besom. 'I will stop it!' he boomed. 'And you shall come with me. You may be
able to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well
as in front. Our roads go together — to Isengard!' 'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do what we can.' 'Yes!' said Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I
should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I shall never
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.' 'Good! Good!' said Treebeard. 'But I spoke hastily. We must not be
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier
to shout stop\ than to do it.' He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain
of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the drops of
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent. After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring again. He seemed to be
counting on his fingers. 'Fangorn, Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. 'The trouble is that there are so few of us left,' he said turning towards
the hobbits. 'Only three remain of the first Ents that walked in the woods
before the Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and Finglas and Fladrif — to
give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for
this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy, almost tree-ish, you might say: he
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He
used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been too drowsy to walk far
even then. Skinbark lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is
where the worst trouble has been. He was wounded by the Ores, and many of
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up
into the high places, among the birches that he loves best, and he will not
come down. Still, I daresay I could get together a fair company of our
younger folks-if I could make them understand the need: if I could rouse
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!' 'Why are there so few when you have lived in this country so long?'
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?' 'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None have died from inside, as you might
say. Some have fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and
more have grown tree-ish. But there were never many of us and we have not
increased. There have been no Entings — no children, you would say, not for
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.' 'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?' 'They did not dieV said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung
among Elves and Men from Mirkwood to Gondor. They cannot be quite
forgotten.' 'Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to
the Shire,' said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the
songs?' 'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. 'But I cannot tell it properly, only in short; and then we must end our
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey
to begin.' 'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When
the world was young, and the woods were wide and wild, the Ents and the
Entwives — and there were Entmaidens then: ah! the loveliness of
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the lightfooted, in the days of our youth! — they
walked together and they housed together. But our hearts did not go on
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills;
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees
let fall in their path; and they learned of the Elves and spoke with the
Trees. But the Entwives gave their minds to the lesser trees, and to the
meads in the sunshine beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe
in the thicket, and the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and
the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in the
autumn fields. They did not desire to speak with these things; but they
wished them to hear and obey what was said to them. The Entwives ordered
them to grow according to their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to their
liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they
meant that things should remain where they had set them). So the Entwives
made gardens to live in. But we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to
the gardens now and again. Then when the Darkness came in the North, the
Entwives crossed the Great River, and made new gardens, and tilled new
fields, and we saw them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the
land of the Entwives blossomed richly, and their fields were full of corn. Many men learned the crafts of the Entwives and honoured them greatly; but
we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here
we still are, while all the gardens of the Entwives are wasted: Men call
them the Brown Lands now. 'I remember it was long ago — in the time of the war between Sauron
and the Men of the Sea — desire came over me to see Fimbrethil again. Very
fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though little like
the Entmaiden of old. For the Entwives were bent and browned by their
labour; their hair parched by the sun to the hue of ripe corn and their
cheeks like redapples. Yet their eyes were still the eyes of our own
people. We crossed over Anduin and came to their land: but we found a
desert: it was all burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the
Entwives were not there. Long we called, and long we searched; and we asked
all folk that we met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had
never seen them; and some said that they had seen them walking away west,
and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find
them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild wood called, and we returned
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the
Entwives. walking far and wide and calling them by their beautiful names.
But as time passed we went more seldom and wandered less far. And now the
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our beards are long and grey. The
Elves made many songs concerning the Search of the Ents, and some of the
songs passed into the tongues of Men. But we made no songs about it, being
content to chant their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives. We
believe that we may meet again in a time to come, and perhaps we shall find
somewhere a land where we can live together and both be content. But it is
foreboded that that will only be when we have both lost all that we now
have. And it may well be that that time is drawing near at last. For if
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely to wither
all the woods. 'There was an Elvish song that spoke of this, or at least so I
understand it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But
we know it by heart, and hum it now and again. This is how it runs in your
tongue: ENT. When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow; When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain-air, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair! entwife. When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair. ent. When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best! entwife. When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town; When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!
ent. When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again! entwife. When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past; I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain! both. Together we will take the road that leads into the West, And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest. ' Treebeard ended his song. 'That is how it goes,' he said. 'It is
Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is
fair enough. But the Ents could say more on their side, if they had time ! But now I am going to stand up and take a little sleep. Where will you
stand?' 'We usually lie down to sleep,' said Merry. 'We shall be all right
where we are.' 'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I
was forgetting: singing that song put me in mind of old times; almost
thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!' Merry and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass
and fern. It was fresh, and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died down,
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside under the arch they could see
old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The
bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as it spilled
on to his fingers and head, and dripped, dripped, in hundreds of silver
drops on to his feet. Listening to the tinkling of the drops the hobbits
fell asleep. They woke to find a cool sun shining into the great court, and on to
the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff
easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and singing, as he
came up the path between the trees. 'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw
them. 'You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides already today. Now we
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.' He poured them out two full bowls from a stone jar; but from a
different jar. The taste was not the same as it had been the night before:
it was earthier and richer, more sustaining and food-like, so to speak. While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of the bed, and nibbling small
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a necessary part
of breakfast than because they felt hungry), Treebeard stood, humming in
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky. 'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask. 'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a place,
it is a gathering of Ents — which does not often happen nowadays. But I
have managed to make a fair number promise to come. We shall meet in the
place where we have always met: Derndingle Men call it. It is away south
from here. We must be there before noon.' Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the hobbits in his arms as
on the previous day. At the entrance to the court he turned to the right,
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along the feet of great
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods. Soon
Treebeard turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves, where the
trees were larger, taller, and thicker than any that the hobbits had ever
seen before. For a while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they
had noticed when they first ventured into Fangorn, but it soon passed.
Treebeard did not talk to them. He hummed to himself deeply and
thoughtfully, but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded like
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar
boom, and so on with a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed to come out of
the earth, or from boughs above their heads, or perhaps from the boles of
the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side. They had been going for a long while — Pippin had tried to keep count
of the ’ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand —
when Treebeard began to slacken his pace. Suddenly he stopped, put the
hobbits down, and raised his curled hands to his mouth so that they made a
hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out
like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed to echo from the trees. Far off there came from several directions a similar hoom, hom, hoom that
was not an echo but an answer. Treebeard now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders and strode on
again, every now and then sending out another horn-call, and each time the
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked
like an impenetrable wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the
hobbits had never seen before: they branched out right from the roots, and
were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and they bore
many stiff upright flower-spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds. Turning to the left and skirting this huge hedge Treebeard came in a
few strides to a narrow entrance. Through it a worn path passed and dived
suddenly down a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending
into a great dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It was smooth and grassclad
inside, and there were no trees except three very tall and beautiful
silver -birches that stood at the bottom of the bowl. Two other paths led
down into the dingle: from the west and from the east. Several Ents had already arrived. More were coming in down the other
paths, and some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits
gazed at them. They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like
Treebeard as one hobbit is like another (at any rate to a stranger's eye);
and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the kind. The Ents were
as different from one another as trees from trees: some as different as one
tree is from another of the same name but quite different growth and
history; and some as different as one tree-kind from another, as birch from
beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents, bearded and gnarled like
hale but ancient trees (though none looked as ancient as Treebeard); and
there were tall strong Ents, clean-limbed and smooth-skinned like
forest-trees in their prime; but there were no young Ents, no saplings.
Altogether there were about two dozen standing on the wide grassy floor of
the dingle, and as many more were marching in. At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety that they
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes and fingers (anything from
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded
them of beech-trees or oaks. But there were other kinds. Some recalled the
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick
legs. Some recalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-fingered
hands and long legs; some the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch,
the rowan, and the linden. But when the Ents all gathered round Treebeard,
bowing their heads slightly, murmuring in their slow musical voices, and
looking long and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw that they
were all of the same kindred, and all had the same eyes: not all so old or
so deep as Treebeard's, but all with the same slow, steady, thoughtful
expression, and the same green flicker. As soon as the whole company was assembled, standing in a wide circle
round Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began. The Ents
began to murmur slowly: first one joined and then another, until they were
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one
side of the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom on the
other side. Though he could not catch or understand any of the words — he
supposed the language was Entish — Pippin found the sound very pleasant to
listen to at first; but gradually his attention wavered. After a long time
(and the chant showed no signs of slackening) he found himself wondering,
since Entish was such an ’unhasty' language, whether they had yet got
further than Good Morning ; and if Treebeard was to call the roll, how many
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for
yes or no,' he thought. He yawned. Treebeard was immediately aware of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he
said, and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk, I
was forgetting; and anyway it is wearisome listening to a speech you do not
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot,
and they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Ores, and that a
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle,
if you like. There is a well of good water, if you need refreshing, away
yonder in the north bank. There are still some words to speak before the
Moot really begins. I will come and see you again, and tell you how things
are going.' He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed low. This
feat seemed to amuse the Ents very much, to judge by the tone of their
murmurs, and the flicker of their eyes; but they soon turned back to their
own business. Merry and Pippin climbed up the path that came in from the
west, and looked through the opening in the great hedge. Long tree-clad
slopes rose from the lip of the dingle, and away beyond them, above the
fir-trees of the furthest ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of a
high mountain. Southwards to their left they could see the forest falling
away down into the grey distance. There far away there was a pale green
glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan. 'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin. 'I don’t know quite where we are,' said Merry; 'but that peak is
probably Methedras. and as far as I can remember the ring of Isengard lies
in a fork or deep cleft at the end of the mountains. It is probably down
behind this great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left
of the peak, don't you think?' 'What is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do about
it anyway.' 'So do I,' said Merry. 'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or
hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock in
the middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has a tower on it. There is a gate,
perhaps more than one, in the encircling wall, and I believe there is a
stream running through it; it comes out of the mountains, and flows on
across the Gap of Rohan. It does not seem the sort of place for Ents to
tackle. But I have an odd feeling about these Ents: somehow I don't think
they are quite as safe and, well funny as they seem. They seem slow, queer,
and patient, almost sad; and yet I believe they could be roused. If that
happened, I would rather not be on the other side.' 'Yes!' said Pippin. 'I know what you mean. There might be all the
difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing, and a bull
charging; and the change might come suddenly. I wonder if Treebeard will
rouse them. I am sure he means to try. But they don't like being roused.
Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.' The hobbits turned back. The voices of the Ents were still rising and
falling in their conclave. The sun had now risen high enough to look over
the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of the birches and lit the northward
side of the dingle with a cool yellow light. There they saw a little
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again,
and not to be in a hurry-and then they climbed down to the gushing water.
They drank a little, a clean, cold, sharp draught, and sat down on a mossy
stone, watching the patches of sun on the grass and the shadows of the
sailing clouds passing over the floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and
far from everything that had ever happened to them. A great longing came
over them for the faces and voices of their companions, especially for Frodo
and Sam, and for Strider. At last there came a pause in the Ent -voices; and looking up they saw
Treebeard coming towards them, with another Ent at his side. 'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or
feeling impatient, hmm, eh? Well, I am afraid that you must not get
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to
explain things again to those that live a long way off, far from Isengard,
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and after that we
shall have to decide what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take
Ents so long as going over all the facts and events that they have to make
up their minds about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long
time yet: a couple of days very likely. So I have brought you a companion. He has an ent-house nearby. Bregalad is his Elvish name. He says he has
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought to get on together.
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them. Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was
tall, and seemed to be one of the younger Ents; he had smooth shining skin
on his arms and legs; his lips were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He
could bend and sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last he spoke, and
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's. 'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk!' he said. 'I am Bregalad,
that is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only a nickname, of course. They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still
wetting their beards. Come with me!' He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long -fingered hand to each
of the hobbits. All that day they walked about in the woods with him,
singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam often laughed. He laughed if the sun
came out from behind a cloud, he laughed if they came upon a stream or
spring: then he stooped and splashed his feet and head with water; he
laughed sometimes at some sound or whisper in the trees. Whenever he saw a
rowan-tree he halted a while with his arms stretched out, and sang, and
swayed as he sang. At nightfall he brought them to his ent -house: nothing more than a
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle
about it, and there was water (as in all ent -houses), a spring bubbling out
from the bank. They talked for a while as darkness fell on the forest. Not
far away the voices of the Entmoot could be heard still going on; but now
they seemed deeper and less leisurely, and every now and again one great
voice would rise in a high and quickening music, while all the others died
away. But beside them Bregalad spoke gently in their own tongue, almost
whispering; and they learned that he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That seemed to the hobbits
quite enough to explain his ’hastiness', at least in the matter of Ores. 'There were rowan-trees in my home,' said Bregalad, softly and sadly,
'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the
quiet of the world. The oldest were planted by the Ents to try and please
the Entwives; but they looked at them and smiled and said that they knew
where whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no trees
of all that race, the people of the Rose, that are so beautiful to me. And
these trees grew and grew, till the shadow of each was like a green hall,
and their red berries in the autumn were a burden, and a beauty and a
wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and
the rowan has enough and to spare. But the birds became unfriendly and
greedy and tore at the trees, and threw the fruit down and did not eat it. Then Ores came with axes and cut down my trees. I came and called them by
their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they
lay dead. O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay ! O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day,
Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft: Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft! O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey; Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day. O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of the soft singing of Bregalad,
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved. The next day they spent also in his company, but they did not go far
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter of the
bank; for the wind was colder, and the clouds closer and greyer; there was
little sunshine, and in the distance the voices of the Ents at the Moot
still rose and fell, sometimes loud and strong, sometimes low and sad,
sometimes quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A second night
came and still the Ents held conclave under hurrying clouds and fitful
stars. The third day broke, bleak and windy. At sunrise the Ents' voices rose
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind
fell and the air grew heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could see that
Bregalad was now listening intently, although to them, down in the dell of
his ent -house, the sound of the Moot was faint. The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains, sent
out long yellow beams between the cracks and fissures of the clouds.
Suddenly they were aware that everything was very quiet; the whole forest
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent- voices had stopped. What did
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards
towards Derndingle. Then with a crash came a great ringing shout: ra-hoom-rah! The trees
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and
then a marching music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong. We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom! The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song: We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-ryna ryna ryna rom! Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house. Before long they saw the marching line approaching: the Ents were
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was
at their head, and some fifty followers were behind him, two abreast,
keeping step with their feet and beating time with their hands upon their
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen. 'Hoom, hom! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last!' called
Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad and the hobbits. ’Come, join the
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!' To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices. 'To Isengard!' To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone; Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door; For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars — we go to war! To land of gloom with tramp of doom, with roll of drum, we come, we
come; To Isengard with doom we come! With doom we come, with doom we come! So they sang as they marched southwards. Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into the line beside Treebeard. The
old Ent now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and
so they rode proudly at the head of the sin ng company with beating hearts
and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually,
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as
sudden as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike. 'The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' Pippin ventured to say after some time, when for a moment the singing
paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard. 'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected.
Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our
trees and our lives are in great danger. That has not happened in this
Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea. It is the ore-work,
the wanton hewing — rbrum — without even the bad excuse of feeding the
fires, that has so angered us; and the treachery of a neighbour, who should
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know better. There is
no curse in Elvish, Entish, or the tongues of Men bad enough for such
treachery. Down with Saruman!' 'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry. 'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps, how strong
we are. Maybe you have heard of Trolls? They are mighty strong. But Trolls
are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in the Great Darkness, in mockery
of Ents, as Ores were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls. We are made of
the bones of the earth. We can split stone like the roots of trees, only
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused! If we are not hewn down, or
destroyed by fire or blast of sorcery, we could split Isengard into
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.' 'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?' 'Hm, ah, yes, that is so. I have not forgotten it. Indeed I have
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.
by many lives of trees. They are all roused now. and their mind is all on
one thing: breaking Isengard. But they will start thinking again before
long; they will cool down a little, when we take our evening drink. What a
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.' Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a while. But after a
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that
his old brow was wrinkled and knotted. At last he looked up, and Pippin
could see a sad look in his eyes, sad but not unhappy. There was a light in
them, as if the green flame had sunk deeper into the dark wells of his
thought. 'Of course, it is likely enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely
enough that we are going to our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we
stayed at home and did nothing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later.
That thought has long been growing in our hearts; and that is why we are
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the
Ents may be worth a song. Aye,' he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the songs come true
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to see Fimbrethil again. But
there, my friends, songs like trees bear fruit only in their own time and
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.' The Ents went striding on at a great pace. They had descended into a
long fold of the land that fell away southward; now they began to climb up,
and up, on to the high western ridge. The woods fell away and they came to
scattered groups of birch, and then to bare slopes where only a few gaunt
pine-trees grew. The sun sank behind the dark hill-back in front. Grey dusk
fell.
Pippin looked behind. The number of the Ents had grown — or what was
happening? Where the dim bare slopes that they had crossed should lie, he
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were moving! Could it be that the
trees of Fangorn were awake, and the forest was rising, marching over the
hills to war? He rubbed his eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like
wind in many branches. The Ents were drawing near the crest of the ridge
now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was
to be heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the feet of the Ents,
and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of many drifting leaves. At last
they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft
at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman. 'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard.
Chapter 5 . The White Rider 'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping
his feet. Day had come at last. At dawn the companions had made such
breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits. 'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I
could see the print of a boot.' 'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas. 'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he
seemed,' answered the Dwarf. 'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the
grass is deep and springy.' 'That would not baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli. 'A bent blade is enough
for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to find any traces. It was an
evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I am sure of it, even under
the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even now,
maybe.' 'It is likely enough,' said Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. But I
did not think so. Did you hear them, Legolas? Did they sound to you like
beasts in terror?' 'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our
own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with some sudden
gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend that they have
long missed.' 'So I thought,' said Aragorn; 'but I cannot read the riddle, unless
they return. Come! The light is growing fast. Let us look first and guess
later! We should begin here, near to our own camping-ground, searching
carefully all about, and working up the slope towards the forest. To find
the hobbits is our errand, whatever we may think of our visitor in the
night. If they escaped by some chance, then they must have hidden in the
trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the
eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and
among the ashes. But there is little hope there: the horsemen of Rohan did
their work too well.' For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the ground. The
tree stood mournfully above them, its dry leaves now hanging limp, and
rattling in the chill easterly wind. Aragorn moved slowly away. He came to
the ashes of the watch-fire near the river -bank, and then began to retrace
the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly
he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to
the others. They came running up. 'Here at last we find news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf
for them to see, a large pale leaf of golden hue, now fading and turning
brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf of Lurien, and there are small crumbs on it,
and a few more crumbs in the grass. And see! there are some pieces of cut
cord lying nearby!' 'And here is the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew
out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged
blade. The haft from which it had been snapped was beside it. 'It was an
ore-weapon,' he said, holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the
carved handle: it had been shaped like a hideous head with squinting eyes
and leering mouth. 'Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed
Legolas. 'A bound prisoner escapes both from the Ores and from the
surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his
bonds with an ore-knife. But how and why? For if his legs were tied, how did
he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither
were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he
then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show
that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he
turned his arms into wings and flew away singing into the trees. It should
be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!' 'There was sorcery here right enough,' said Gimli. 'What was that old
man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you
better it?' 'Maybe, I could,' said Aragorn, smiling. 'There are some other signs
near at hand that you have not considered. I agree that the prisoner was a
hobbit and must have had either legs or hands free, before he came here. I
guess that it was hands, because the riddle then becomes easier, and also
because, as I read the marks, he was carried to this point by an Ore. Blood
was spilled there, a few paces away, ore-blood. There are deep prints of
hoofs all about this spot, and signs that a heavy thing was dragged away. The Ore was slain by horsemen, and later his body was hauled to the fire. But the hobbit was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and
he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and hungry, and it is not to
be wondered at that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen
enemy, he rested and ate a little before he crept away. But it is a comfort
to know that he had some lembas in his pocket, even though he ran away
without gear or pack; that, perhaps, is like a hobbit. I say he, though I
hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin were here together. There is,
however, nothing to show that for certain.' 'And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand
free?' asked Gimli. 'I do not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor do I know why
an Ore was carrying them away. Not to help them to escape, we may be sure.
Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled
me from the beginning: why when Boromir had fallen were the Ores content
with the capture of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us,
nor attack our camp; but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard. Did they suppose they had captured the Ring -bearer and his faithful comrade? I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Ores,
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of
the Ring: they are not trusty servants. But I think the Ores had been
commanded to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs. An attempt was made to
slip out with the precious prisoners before the battle. Treachery perhaps,
likely enough with such folk; some large and bold Ore may have been trying
to escape with the prize alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale. Others might be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least
of our friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help him before we
return to Rohan. We must not be daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him
into that dark place.' 'I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the
long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli. 'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn. It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point, near
the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints, but too
light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath the bole of a great
tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was
bare and dry, and did not reveal much. 'One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and then
he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn. 'Then we must go in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look of
this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had led
anywhere else!' 'I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,' said
Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he
were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is not
evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of
dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near
us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.' 'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,' said Gimli. 'I have done
it no harm. ' 'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has suffered
harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do you not
feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.' 'I feel the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.' 'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost I feel young
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and
full of memory. I could have been happy here, if I had come in days of
peace.' 'I dare say you could,' snorted Gimli. 'You are a Wood-elf, anyway,
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go,
I will go. But keep your bow ready to hand, and I will keep my axe loose in
my belt. Not for use on trees,' he added hastily, looking up at the tree
under which they stood. 'I do not wish to meet that old man at unawares
without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!' With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas
and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The
floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing
that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned often to the banks
of the stream. So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin
had drunk and bathed their feet. There plain for all to see were the
footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other.
This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet the marks are two days old
And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water -side.’ Then what shall we do now?’ said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do not find
them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and
show our friendship by starving together.' 'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,' said Aragorn. 'Let us go on.' They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard's Hill and
looked up at the rock -wall with its rough steps leading to the high shelf.
Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now
looked less grey and drear. 'Let us go up and look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.' The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly: he was
scanning the steps and ledges closely. 'I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,' he said. 'But
there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not understand. I
wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will help us to guess
which way they went next?' He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of any use.
The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the east was the view
open. There he could see the heads of the trees descending in ranks towards
the plain from which they had come. 'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas. 'We could have all
come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on the second or
third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither their road will lead
them, till they come to its end.' 'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli. 'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!' 'Look at what?' said Gimli. 'There in the trees.' 'Where? I have not elf-eyes.' 'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!' said Legolas pointing. 'Down in the
wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him,
passing from tree to tree?' 'I see, I see now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you?
There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could not see
him at first.' Aragorn looked and beheld a bent figure moving slowly. It was not far
away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough
staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look towards them. In other lands
they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each
feeling a strange expectancy: something was approaching that held a hidden
power-or menace. Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew
nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your
bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or
put a spell upon us! Shoot first!' Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the
string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent. 'Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?' said Gimli in a
hissing whisper. 'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not shoot an old man
so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and
wait!' At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with surprising
speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they
stood motionless looking down. There was no sound. They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore
a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were over-shadowed, except for
the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to Aragorn that he
caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within the shadow of the
hooded brows. At last the old man broke the silence. 'Well met indeed, my friends,'
he said in a soft voice. 'I wish to speak to you. Will you come down or
shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb. 'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!' 'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?' said the old man. 'Put
away that bow, Master Elf!' The bow and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at
his sides. 'And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft, till I
am up! You will not need such arguments.' Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness seemed to have
left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a gleam, too brief for
certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake of Gimli's breath could be
heard as a loud hiss in the silence. 'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he
was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust
forward, peering at them from under his hood. 'And what may you be doing in
these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf, all clad in elvish fashion. No
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often
seen here.' 'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?' 'Not well,' said the old man: 'that would be the study of many lives. But I come here now and again.' 'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say
to us?' said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand that will
not wait.' 'As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be doing,
and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!' He broke off,
laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run through him at the
sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not fear or terror that he
felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen air, or the slap of a
cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper. 'My name!' said the old man again. 'Have you not guessed it already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come
now, what of your tale?' The three companions stood silent and made no answer. 'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand is fit to
tell,' said the old man. 'Happily I know something of it. You are tracking
the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as
if you had never heard the strange name before. You have, and so have I.
Well, they climbed up here the day before yesterday; and they met someone
that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And now you would like to
know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news
about
that. But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.' The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones and
rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had been
removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli's hand went at once to his
axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow. The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a low flat
stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he
was clothed beneath all in white. 'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand, 'speak!
Tell us where you have hidden our friends ! What have you done with them?
Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even a wizard will find it
hard to deal with!' The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to
the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above
them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His white garments shone.
He lifted up his staff, and Gimli's axe leaped from his grasp and fell
ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand,
blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high
into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame. 'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!' 'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man. They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine; and
gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were bright,
piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy,
and fear they stood and found no words to say. At last Aragorn stirred. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'Beyond all hope you
return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said
nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes. 'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long
disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.' He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it
about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but now was hid in
cloud again. 'Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,' he said, and the voice
was the voice of their old friend and guide. 'Get up, my good Gimli! No
blame to you, and no harm done to me. Indeed my friends, none of you have
any weapon that could hurt me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the
tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.' He laid his hand on Gimli’s head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!' 'Yes, I am white now,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed I am Saruman, one might
almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell me of
yourselves! I have passed through fire and deepwater, since we parted. I
have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had
forgotten. I can see many things far off, but many things that are close at
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!' 'What do you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since
we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not first give us
news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?' 'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the
valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivity, until the
eagle told me.' 'The eagle!' said Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the
last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.' 'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me
from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself. The Ring now has
passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the Company that set out from
Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but it escaped. I had
some part in that: for I sat in a high place, and I strove with the Dark
Tower; and the Shadow passed. Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked
long in dark thought.' 'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?' 'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him
still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I
can say.' 'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.' 'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on
his face. 'Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by
me and tell me the tale of your journey.' The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took up the
tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no questions. His
hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were closed. At last when
Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great
River, the old man sighed. 'You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,' he
said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was a
sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men. Galadriel told me
that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I am glad. It was not in
vain that the young hobbits came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But
that is not the only part they have to play. They were brought to Fangorn,
and their coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an
avalanche in the mountains. Even as we talk here, I hear the first
rumblings. Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam
bursts!' 'In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,' said Aragorn: 'you
still speak in riddles.' 'What? In riddles?' said Gandalf. 'No! For I was talking aloud to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to speak
to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but
the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine. 'I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient
Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?' 'What then shall I say?' said Gandalf, and paused for a while in
thought. 'This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish to
have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long
known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne by a hobbit. He knows
now the number of our Company that set out from Rivendell, and the kind of
each of us. But he does not yet perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes
that we were all going to Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself
have done in our place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a
heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what
mighty one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with
war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should wish to
cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that occurs to
his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered
into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune and
our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war, believing that he has no
time to waste; for he that strikes the first blow, if he strikes it hard
enough, may need to strike no more. So the forces that he has long been
preparing he is now setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter,
and bent all his guild to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas
Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm. ’For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay the
Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring. Neither have they
brought away any hobbits as hostages. Flad they done even so much as that, it
would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us
not darken our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:' 'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli. 'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf. 'Doubly. And is not that strange? Nothing
that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason of
Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong.
He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help from Minas Tirith,
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon
is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman also had a mind to capture the Ring,
for himself, or at least to snare some hobbits for his evil purposes. So
between them our enemies have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with
marvellous speed, and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they
would never have come at all! 'Also they have filled themselves with new doubts that disturb their
plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen
of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were taken in the Emyn
Muil and borne away towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,
it will go ill with Saruman.' 'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land
divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we watched and
waited.' 'The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt,'
said Gandalf. 'But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman first
obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril.
There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his
prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on
his messengers. But he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and
beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes
that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle; but he does
not know whether the Ores were bringing any prisoners or not. And he does
not know of the quarrel between his servants and the Ores of Mordor; nor
does he know of the Winged Messenger.' 'The Winged Messenger!' cried Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of
Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He filled us all
with fear. What new terror is this?' 'One that you cannot slay with arrows,' said Gandalf. 'You only slew
his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again. For he
was a Nazgyl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon winged steeds. Soon their
terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and Saruman does not
know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought
is ever on the Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if
Thjoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is
the danger that he sees, and he has fled back to Isengard to double and
treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close
at hand, which he does not see, busy with his fiery thoughts. He has
forgotten Treebeard.' 'Now you speak to yourself again,' said Aragorn with a smile.
'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman's double
treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn
has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.' 'Wait a minute!' cried Gimli. 'There is another thing that I should
like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?' 'You certainly did not see me,' answered Gandalf, 'therefore I must
guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire
to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.' 'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.' Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a comfort
not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too well! But, of
course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me. How could I do so, who
have so often counselled my friends to suspect even their own hands when
dealing with the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see
us both together one day and judge between us!' 'But the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have come far to seek them,
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?' 'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf. 'The Ents!' exclaimed Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends
about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were only a memory of
ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.' 'A legend of Rohan!' cried Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us they
are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking in this world, then
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem to speak of a person. Who is
this Treebeard?' 'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of
his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now.
Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the oldest of the
Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this
Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and
Pippin have been fortunate: they met him here, even where we sit. For he
came here two days ago and bore them away to his dwelling far off by the
roots of the mountains. He often comes here, especially when his mind is
uneasy, and rumours of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days
ago striding among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I
did not speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle
with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.' 'Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you
speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.' 'Dangerous!' cried Gandalf. 'And so am I, very dangerous: more
dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought alive
before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas is
dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of Gluin; for you are
dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is
perilous-not least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn
himself, he is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now
his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled with it. The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it:
it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman
and the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not happened
since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they are
strong.’ ’What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment. 'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think they know themselves. I
wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought. The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell
on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed to be filled
with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight
at the sun. 'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.' 'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn. 'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not the road that you must take. I have
spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of the Ring
could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.' He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw things
far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he said
in a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let us be
glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a
peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.' He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!' he said. 'Do not regret
your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain pursuit. You
chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice was just, and it
has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met
too late. But the quest of your companions is over. Your next journey is
marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Thjoden in
his hall. For you are needed. The light of And®ril must now be uncovered in the
battle for which it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse
evil: it goes ill with Thjoden.' 'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas.
'I did not say so,' said Gandalf. ’Who knows? Have patience. Go where
you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.’ 'It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,' said Aragorn. 'I
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.’ 'We shall see, we shall see,' said Gandalf. 'Will you come now with
me?' 'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that
you will come there before me, if you wish.' He rose and looked long at
Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing one
another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn, was tall, and
stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he looked as if some
king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the shores of lesser men.
Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some light
kindled within, bent, laden with years, but holding a power beyond the
strength of kings. 'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go
whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you are our
captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we have One, mightier
than they: the White Rider. He has passed through the fire and the abyss,
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.' 'Yes, together we will follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you not tell
us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?' 'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But
if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.' 'Then tell us what you will, and time allows!' said Gimli. 'Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!' 'Name him not!' said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that a cloud
of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long
time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with difficulty. 'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then
we plunged into the deep water and all was dark. Cold it was as the tide of
death: almost it froze my heart.' 'Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin's Bridge, and none has
measured it,' said Gimli. 'Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,' said Gandalf.
'Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He was with
me still. His fire was quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger
than a strangling snake. 'We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever
he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled into dark
tunnels. They were not made by Durin's folk, Gimli son of Gluin. Far, far
below the deepest delving of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed by nameless
things. Even Sauron knows them not. They are older than he. Now I have
walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that
despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel.
Thus he brought me back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dym: too well
he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.' 'Long has that been lost,' said Gimli. 'Many have said that it was
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.' 'It was made, and it had not been destroyed,' said Gandalf. 'From the
lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed, ascending in unbroken spiral
in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in Durin's Tower carved in
the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine. 'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay
a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The sun shone
fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out he sprang, and even
as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps
in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly
Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from
afar thought that the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard,
and lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken into
tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and
steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high
place and broke the mountain-side where he smote it in his ruin. Then
darkness took me; and I strayed out of thought and time, and I wandered far
on roads that I will not tell. 'Naked I was sent back — for a brief time, until my task is done. And
naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust,
the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I
was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn of the world. There
I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long
as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all
lands: the springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow
everlasting groan of overburdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir the
Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away. ’ ’Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said. 1 'A burden you have been,' he answered, 'but not so now. Light as a
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you. Indeed I do
not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall you would float upon
the wind.' ' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me
to Lothlurien!' ' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look
for you,' he answered. 'Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately
gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days bring
healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white. Counsel I
gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I bring
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this: Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar? Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar? Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth, And the Grey Company ride from the North. But dark is the path appointed for thee: The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea. To Legolas she sent this word: Legolas Greenleaf long under tree In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Seal If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore, Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more. ' Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes. 'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head. 'Dark are her words,' said Legolas, 'and little do they mean to those
that receive them.' 'That is no comfort,' said Gimli. 'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would you have her speak openly to you of
your death?' 'Yes. if she had nought else to say.' 'What is that?' said Gandalf, opening his eyes. 'Yes, I think I can
guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli ! I was pondering the
messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and neither dark nor
sad. ’ "To Gimli son of Gluin," she said, "give his Lady's greeting. Lock -bearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But have a care
to lay thine axe to the right tree ! " ’ ’In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,' cried the Dwarf,
capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!’ he
shouted, swinging his axe. ’Since Gandalf s head is now sacred, let us find
one that it is right to cleave!’ ’That will not be far to seek,’ said Gandalf, rising from his seat. 'Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted
friends. Now there is need of haste.' He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the way.
Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way
back through the forest, down the bank of the Entwash. They spoke no more
words, until they stood again upon the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn.
There was no sign of their horses to be seen. ’They have not returned,’ said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!' 'I shall not walk. Time presses,' said Gandalf. Then lifting up his
head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that the
others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips.
Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it seemed to them that
they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from the plains upon the eastern
wind. They waited wondering. Before long there came the sound of hoofs, at
first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as
he lay upon the grass, then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick
beat. 'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn. ’Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.' 'There are three,' said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. 'See how
they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside him! But
there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his
like before.' 'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief
of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Thjoden, King of Rohan, has
ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly
as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White Rider. We are
going to battle together.' Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up the
slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind
of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind. As soon as Shadowfax
saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whinnied loudly; then trotting gently
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the
old man's neck. Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he
said; 'but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride now
together, and part not in this world again!' Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting
orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master, Thjoden,' said
Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads. 'Time presses, so
with your leave, my friends, we will ride. We beg you to use all the speed
that you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli
before me, and by his leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now
only to drink a little.' 'Now I understand a part of last night's riddle,' said Legolas as he
sprang lightly upon Arod's back. 'Whether they fled at first in fear, or
not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?' 'Yes, I knew,' said the wizard. 'I bent my thought upon him, bidding
him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land.
Swiftly may he bear me back again!' Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good pace,
yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while he turned
suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were lower, he waded the
river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of grass. There was
no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter. 'He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Thjoden under
the slopes of the White Mountains,' said Gandalf. 'It will be quicker so. The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,
across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.' For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the
grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the riders, and their
steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many
hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and treacherous bogs; but
Shadowfax found the way, and the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly
the sun fell from the sky down into the West. Looking out over the great
plain, far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into
the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the
hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim
of earth. ’There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west
of us. That way lies Isengard.' 'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?' 'Battle and war!' said Gandalf. 'Ride on!'
Chapter 6 . The King of the Golden Hall They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night. When
at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and weary.
Gandalf only allowed them a few hours' rest. Legolas and Gimli slept and
Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his
staff, gazing into the darkness, east and west. All was silent, and there
was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,
fleeting on a chill wind, when they arose again. Under the cold moon they
went on once more, as swift as by the light of day. Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen
from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod,
weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a grey shadow before them
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon sank into the cloudy
West. A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded to
a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the Emyn
Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind swept
across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Suddenly Shadowfax
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead. 'Look!' he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black. The
grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet, and
flowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the light of
dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately
before the travellers the widest of these glens opened like a long gulf
among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled mountain-mass with one
tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there stood like sentinel a lonely
height. About its feet there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that
issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still far away, a glint in
the rising sun, a glimmer of gold. ’Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us
what you see there before us!' Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the
new-risen sun. 'I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,' he
said. 'Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon
the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within there
rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there
stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems to my eyes that it is
thatched with gold. The light of it shines far over the land. Golden, too,
are the posts of its doors. There men in bright mail stand; but all else
within the courts are yet asleep.’ 'Edoras those courts are called,’ said Gandalf, ’and Meduseld is that
golden hall. There dwells Thjoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan.
We are come with the rising of the day. Now the road lies plain to see
before us. But we must ride more warily; for war is abroad, and the
Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar. Draw
no weapon, speak no haughty word, I counsel you all, until we are come
before Thjoden’s seat.’ The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were singing,
when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain,
and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their path in a wide bend,
flowing away east to feed the Entwash far off in its reed-choked beds. The
land was green: in the wet meads and along the grassy borders of the stream
grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red
at their fingertips. Feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there
was a ford between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the
uplands. At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of many
mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with
a drifted snow: small flowers sprang there like countless stars amid the
turf. ’Look!’ said Gandalf. ’How fair are the bright eyes in the grass!
Evermind they are called, simbelmynl in this land of Men, for they blossom
in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are
come to the great barrows where the sires of Thjoden sleep.’ 'Seven mounds
upon the left, and nine upon the right,’ said Aragorn. ’Many long lives of
men it is since the golden hall was built.’ ’Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home
since then,’ said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.’ ’But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,’ said Aragorn, ’that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years
before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home,
their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.' Then he
began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the Elf and Dwarf; yet
they listened, for there was a strong music in it. That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it
is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and
stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that it is
laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.' 'It runs thus in the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as I can
make it. Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing? Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing? Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing? They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow; The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow. Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning, Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning? Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall and
fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and there were
wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaruf, father of horses. So men still
sing in the evening.' With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the
winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came at last to the
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras. There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and
barred the way with spears. 'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in
the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names and errand of the
strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked
darkly upon Gandalf. 'Well do I understand your speech,' he answered in the same language;
'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue,
as is the custom in the West, if you wish to be answered?' 'It is the will of Thjoden King that none should enter his gates, save
those who know our tongue and are our friends,' replied one of the guards.
'None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk, and those that come
from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over
the plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own horses? Long have
we kept guard here, and we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen
other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that
bear you. He is One of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some
spell. Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his
craft? Speak now and be swift!' 'We are no phantoms,' said Aragorn, 'nor do your eyes cheat you. For
indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well are you
asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable. Here are
Hasufel and Arod, that Jomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, lent to us,
only two days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has
not Jomer then returned and given warning of our coming?' A troubled look came into the guard's eyes. 'Of Jomer I have naught to
say,' he answered. 'If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Thjoden
will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is
but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of
Thjoden no stranger should pass these gates.' 'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in
haste. Will you not go or send to say that we are come?' His eyes glinted
under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man. 'Yes, I will go,' he answered slowly. 'But what names shall I report? And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet you are
fell and grim beneath, I deem' 'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have
returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great,
whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me is Aragorn son of
Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas
the Elf and Gimli the Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master
that we are at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit
us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report
them as you bid and learn my master's will,' said the guard. 'Wait here a
little while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not
hope too much! These are dark days.' He went swiftly away, leaving the
strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades. After some time he
returned. ’Follow me!' he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave to enter; but any
weapon that you bear; be it only a staff, you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.' The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file
behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn stones, now
winding upward, now climbing in short flights of well-laid steps. Many
houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed. Beside the way in a
stone channel a stream of clear water flowed, sparkling and chattering. At
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above
a green terrace, at the foot of which a bright spring gushed from a stone
carved in the likeness of a horse's head; beneath was a wide basin from
which the water, spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace
went a stair of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost
step were stone-hewn sea, There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid
upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the sun
was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets were burnished
bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men. ’There are the doors before you,’ said the guide. ’I must return now to
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark be gracious to
you!’ He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others climbed the
long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent they stood now above
and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out upon the paved terrace at the
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting
in their own tongue. Hail, corners from afar!’ they said, and they turned the hilts of their
swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems flashed in the
sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and spoke in the Common
Speech. ’I am the Doorward of Thjoden,’ he said. ’Hbma is my name. Here I must
bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.’ Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver -hafted knife, his quiver and
his bow. ’Keep these well,’ he said, ’for they come from the Golden Wood and
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.’ Wonder came into the man’s eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the
wall, as if he feared to handle them. 'No man will touch them I promise
you,' he said. Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said, 'to put
aside my sword or to deliver And®ril to the hand of any other man.' 'It is the will of Thjoden,' said Hbma. 'It is not clear to me that the will of Thjoden son of Thengel even
though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son
of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.' 'This is the house of Thjoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King of
Gondor in the seat of Denethor,' said Hbma, stepping swiftly before the
doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand and the point
towards the strangers. 'This is idle talk,' said Gandalf. 'Needless is Thjoden's demand, but
it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall, be it
folly or wisdom.' 'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as the master of the house bade
me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but And®ril.' 'Whatever its name may be,' said Hbma, 'here you shall lay it, if you
would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.' 'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering the blade of his axe, and looking
darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to
fell. 'Not alone!' 'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for
the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is
pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Hbma. Keep it well. Glamdring
it is called, for the Elves made it long ago. Now let me pass. Come,
Aragorn!' Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword upright
against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he said; 'but I command you not to touch
it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this elvish heath dwells
the Blade that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it
in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword
save Elendil's heir.' The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems
that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten days he said. It
shall be, lord, as you command. 'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it has And®ril to keep it company, my axe may
stay here, too, without shame’; and he laid it on the floor. 'Now then, if
all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.’ The guard still hesitated. ’Your staff,' he said to Gandalf. ’Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.' ’Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is
another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then I will sit
out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.’ Aragorn laughed. ’Every man has something too dear to trust to another.
But would you part an old man from his support? Come, will you not let us
enter?' 'The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for age’
said Hbma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in
doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends
and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.' The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly
inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside it
seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the hill. The hall was long
and wide and filled with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its
lofty roof. But here and there bright sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts
from the eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in
the roof, above the thin wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and
blue. As their eyes changed, the travellers perceived that the floor was
paved with stones of many hues; branching runes and strange devices
intertwined beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly
carved, gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths
were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched figures of
ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade. But upon
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a
great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was
lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red as it neighed, smelling battle
afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees. 'Behold Eorl the Young!' said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.' Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning
upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far
end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards the doors, was
a dais with three steps; and in the middle of the dais was a great gilded
chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but
his white hair was long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a
thin golden circle set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone
a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his
eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at the
strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his feet upon
the steps sat a wizened figure of a man, with a pale wise face and
heavy -lidded eyes. There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At length
Gandalf spoke. 'Hail, Thjoden son of Thengel! I have returned. For behold!
the storm comes, and now all friends should gather together, lest each
singly be destroyed.' Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black
staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw that, bent
though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have been high and proud
indeed. 'I greet you,' he said, 'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to
tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever been a
herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the oftener the
worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax had come back
riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack
of the rider; and when Jomer brought the tidings that you had gone at last
to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here
you come again! And with you come evils worse than before, as might be
expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.'
Slowly he sat down again in his chair. 'You speak justly, lord,' said the pale man sitting upon the steps of
the dais. 'It is not yet five days since the bitter tidings came that
Thjodred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right hand, Second
Marshal Of the Mark. In Jomer there is little trust. Few men would be left
to guard your walls, if he had been allowed to rule. And even now we learn
from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such is the hour in
which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed should we welcome you,
Master Stormcrow? Lbthspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill
guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment
and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.
’You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great
support to your master,’ answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two ways
may a man come with evil tidings, lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be
such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.’ ’That is so,’ said Wormtongue; ’but there is a third kind: pickers of
bones, meddlers in other men’s sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow fat on war.
What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now?
It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord
bade you Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and to the wonder of
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses, swords,
spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But who are these
that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey, and you yourself
the most beggar-like of the four!’ ’The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of
Thengel,’ said Gandalf. ’Has not the messenger from your gate reported the
names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three
such guests. Weapons they have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal
man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.’ ’Then it is true, as Jomer reported, that you are in league with the
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?’ said Wormtongue. ’It is not to be wondered
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.’ Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone. In Dwimordene, in Lurien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men, Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright. Galadriel! Galadriel! Clear is the water of your well; White is the star in your white hand; Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
In Dwimordene, in Lurien More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men. Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting his
tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his staff; and he
spoke in a clear cold voice. The wise speak only of what they know, Grnma
son of Gblmud. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and
keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and
death to bandy crooked words with a serving -man till the lightning falls.' He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was blotted
out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night.
The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen, standing white
and tall before the blackened hearth. In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue's voice: 'Did I not
counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Hbma, has betrayed us!'
There was a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent.
Wormtongue sprawled on his face. 'Now Thjoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do
you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a high window. There
the darkness seemed to clear, and through the opening could be seen, high
and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the
Mark; for better help you will not find. No counsel have I to give to those
that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will
you hear them? They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your
doors and look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to
twisted tales and crooked promptings.' Slowly Thjoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again. The woman hastened to the king's side, taking his arm, and with faltering
steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall.
Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to the doors and
Gandalf
knocked. 'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!' The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind was
blowing on the hill. 'Send your guards down to the stairs foot,' said
Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.' 'Go, Jowyn sister-daughter!' said the old king. 'The time for fear is
past.' The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed the
doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her glance, as
she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair was her face,
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall she was in her
white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed and stern as steel, a
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the full light of day
beheld Jowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair and cold, like a
morning of pale spring that is not yet come to womanhood. And she now was
suddenly aware of him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters,
greycloaked. Hiding a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone
she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone. 'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon your land! Breathe the free
air again!' From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see beyond
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading into distant grey. Curtains of
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and to the west was still
dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden
hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had
come out of the East was receding, rolling away southward to the sea.
Suddenly through a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed
down. The falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river
glittered like a shimmering glass. 'It is not so dark here,' said Thjoden. 'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!' From the king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He
drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending over some
dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were blue as he
looked into the opening sky. 'Dark have been my dreams of late,' he said, 'but I feel as one
new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that
already you have come too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not
long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall
devour the high seat. What is to be done?' 'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly
that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Grnma, of him that all save
you name the Wormtongue?' 'It is true,' said Thjoden. 'He had rebelled against my commands, and
threatened death to Grnma in my hall.' 'A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said
Gandalf. 'That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Hbma to me. Since he proved
untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand -runner. The guilty shall
bring the guilty to judgement,' said Thjoden, and his voice was grim, yet he
looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he did so many lines of care were
smoothed away and did not return. When Hbma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led Thjoden to
a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon the topmost stair.
Aragorn and his companions stood nearby. 'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet
if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can speak more
fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of
Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you dream no longer.
You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy is strong beyond our
reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.' Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and none save
the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light shone brighter
in Thjoden's eye, and at the last he rose from his seat to his full height,
and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked out from the high place
towards the East. 'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, 'that way
lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for a little
while.' The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear
bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the Land of Shadow.
Where now was the Ring -bearer? How thin indeed was the thread upon
which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he strained his farseeing eyes,
that he caught a glint of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on a
pinnacle of the Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet
a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame. Slowly Thjoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to
master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his great
house. 'Alas!' he said, 'that these evil days should be mine, and should
come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned. Alas for
Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger, withering.' He
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands. 'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped
a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf. Thjoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at his
belt. 'Where has Grnma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath. 'Take this, dear lord!' said a clear voice. 'It was ever at your
service.' Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few steps
from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no mail was on his
breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and as he knelt he offered
the hilt to his master. 'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the
men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the
old man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick? 'It is my doing, lord,' said Hbma, trembling. I understood that Jomer
was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet,
since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the Mark, ! brought him his
sword as he bade me.' 'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Jomer. For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt
still before him. Neither moved. 'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf. Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers took the hilt,
it seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength returned to his thin
arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering and whistling in
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the
tongue of Rohan a call to arms. Arise now, arise, Riders of Thjoden! Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward. Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas! The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They
looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man they drew their
swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!’ they said. 'Westu Thjoden hbl!' cried Jomer. ’It is a joy to us to see you return
into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only
with grief!’ 'Take back your sword, Jomer, sister-son!' said the king. 'Go, Hbma,
and seek my own sword! Grnma has it in his keeping. Bring him to me also.
Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?' 'You have yourself already taken it,' answered Gandalf. 'To put your
trust in Jomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast aside regret
and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can ride should be sent
west at once, as Jomer counselled you: we must first destroy the threat of
Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we fall. If we succeed — then we
will face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and
the children and the old, should stay to the refuges that you have in the
mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let
them take provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures,
great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.' 'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Thjoden. 'Let all my folk get
ready ! But you my guests-truly you said, Gandalf, that the courtesy of my
hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night, and the morning wears
away. You have had neither sleep nor food. A guest-house shall be made
ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.' 'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men
of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them, axe, sword, and
bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord of the Mark. And
I promised Jomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.' 'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Jomer. 'Hope, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard is strong. And other perils
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Thjoden, when we are gone. Lead your people
swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!' 'Nay, Gandalf!' said the king. 'You do not know your own skill in
healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the front
of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'
'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons, crying: 'The Lord of
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!' 'But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless' said
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?' 'I will take thought for that ere I go,' answered Thjoden. 'Here comes
my counsellor.' At that moment Hbma came again from the hall. Behind him cringing
between two other men, came Grnma the Wormtongue. His face was very
white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Hbma knelt and presented to Thjoden a long
sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and set with green gems. 'Here, lord,
is Herugrim, your ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth
was he to render up the keys. Many other things are there which men have
missed.' 'You lie,' said Wormtongue. 'And this sword your master himself gave
into my keeping.' 'And he now requires it of you again,' said Thjoden. 'Does that
displease you?' 'Assuredly not. lord,' said Wormtongue. 'I care for you and yours as
best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let
others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is about to be set on the
board. Will you not go to it?' 'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all
who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms, all who have
horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from
noon!' 'Dear lord!' cried Wormtongue. 'It is as I feared. This wizard has
bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your
fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?' 'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more wholesome
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on
all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma
shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.' 'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will
stand by you when all others have gone. Do not send your faithful Grnma
away!' 'You have my pity,' said Thjoden. 'And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and prove your
faith.' Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of
a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with
a long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve might be expected from a lord of the
House of Eorl, old though he be,' he said. 'But those who truly love him
would spare his failing years. Yet I see that I come too late. Others, whom
the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows
your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a
faithful steward. Let your counsellor Grnma keep all things till your
return-and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it
hopeful.' Jomer laughed. 'And if that plea does not excuse you from war, most
noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept? To
carry a sack of meal up into the mountains-if any man would trust you with
it?' 'Nay, Jomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master
Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold
and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and wins a throw. Hours of
my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in a
terrible voice. 'Down on your belly! How long is it since Saruman bought
you? What was the promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to
pick your share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long
have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.' Jomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew already,' he muttered. 'For that
reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of the hall. But
there are other reasons.' He stepped forward, but Gandalf stayed him with
his hand. 'Jowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue, you have done what
you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at least. Yet
Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should advise you to go quickly
and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.' 'You lie,' said Wormtongue.
'That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,' said Gandalf. ’I do
not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot take it with
you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be just. But it was not
always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did you service in its fashion.
Give him a horse and let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice
you shall judge him.’ 'Do you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to
ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go
now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet again, I shall not be
merciful.' Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes. Last
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth as if to speak. Then
suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His eyes glittered. Such
malice was in them that men stepped back from him. He bared his teeth; and
then with a hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and darting to
one side, he fled down the stair. 'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not
hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.' 'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer. One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well at the
foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the
stones that Wormtongue had defiled. 'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as
haste allows.' They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in
the town the heralds crying and the war -horns blowing. For the king was to
ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those dwelling near could be
armed and assembled. At the king's board sat Jomer and the four guests, and there also
waiting upon the king was the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman. 'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was
not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend of Rohan; and
even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now
he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of Friendship, until he was
ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that you did was
swiftly known in Isengard; for your land was open, and strangers came and
went. And ever Wormtongue's whispering was in your ears, poisoning your
thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and
could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping. 'But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those
who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, always seeking
to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty:
dulling men's wariness, or working on their fears, as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged that no man should be spared on
a wildgoose chase northward, when the immediate peril was westward? He
persuaded you to forbid Jomer to pursue the raiding Ores. If Jomer had not
defied Wormtongue's voice speaking with your mouth, those Ores would
have reached Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which
Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my Company,
sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I cannot yet speak
openly. Dare you think of what they might now be suffering, or what Saruman
might now have learned to our destruction?' 'I owe much to Jomer,' said Thjoden. 'Faithful heart may have forward
tongue.' 'Say also,' said Gandalf, 'that to crooked eyes truth may wear a
wry face.' 'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Thjoden. 'Most of all I owe to
you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere
we go, at your own choosing. You have only to name aught that is mine. I
reserve now only my sword!' 'Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,' said Gandalf. 'But
as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need: swift and
sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan we may call it.
But now shall ride him into great hazard, setting silver against black: I
would not risk anything that is not my own. And already there is a bond of
love between us.' 'You choose well,' said Thjoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is
a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the mighty
steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And to you my
other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords
you do not need, but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work,
gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they
serve you well!' Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king's hoard and they
arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round
shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and set with gems, green and
red and white. Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of rings,
even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in
the hoards of Edoras of better make than his short corslet forged beneath
the Mountain in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that
fitted well upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore
the running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House of
Eorl. 'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden. 'It was made for me in Thengel's
day, while still I was a boy.' Gimli bowed. 'I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,' he
said. 'Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one. I love my
feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.' 'It may well be so,' said Thjoden. The king now rose, and at once Jowyn came forward bearing wine. 'Ferthu
Thjoden hbl!' she said. 'Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour.
Health be with thee at thy going and coming!' Thjoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As
she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked upon him, and her
eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as
he took the cup, his hand met hers, and he knew that she trembled at the
touch.
