“Stag! You idiot — Expecto Patronum .!” Something huge and horned erupted from the wand:
Head down, it charged toward the High Street and out
of sight. “That’s not what I saw — ” said the Death Eater,
though with less certainty. “Curfew’s been broken, you heard the noise,” one of
his companions told the barman. “Someone was out
in the street against regulations — ” “If I want to put my cat out, I will, and be damned to
your curfew!” “ You set off the Caterwauling Charm?” “What if I did? Going to cart me off to Azkaban? Kill
me for sticking my nose out my own front door? Do it,
then, if you want to! But I hope for your sakes you
haven’t pressed your little Dark Marks and
summoned him. He’s not going to like being called
here for me and my old cat, is he, now?” “Don’t you worry about us,” said one of the Death
Eaters, “worry about yourself, breaking curfew!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“And where will you lot traffick potions and poisons
when my pub’s closed down? What’ll happen to your
little sidelines then?” “Are you threatening — ?” “I keep my mouth shut, it’s why you come here, isn’t
it?” “I still say I saw a stag Patronus!” shouted the first
Death Eater. “Stag?” roared the barman. “It’s a goat, idiot!” “All right, we made a mistake,” said the second Death
Eater. “Break curfew again and we won’t be so
lenient!” The Death Eaters strode back toward the High Street.
Hermione moaned with relief, wove out from under
the Cloak, and sat down on a wobble-legged chair.
Harry drew the curtains tight shut, then pulled the
Cloak off himself and Ron. They could hear the
barman down below, rebolting the door of the bar,
then climbing the stairs. Harry’s attention was caught by something on the
mantelpiece: a small, rectangular mirror propped on
top of it, right beneath the portrait of the girl. The barman entered the room. “You bloody fools,” he said gruffly, looking from one to
the other of them. “What were you thinking, coming
here?” “Thank you,” said Harry. “We can’t thank you
enough. You saved our lives.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The barman grunted. Harry approached him, looking
up into the face, trying to see past the long, stringy,
wire-gray hair and beard. He wore spectacles. Behind
the dirty lenses, the eyes were a piercing, brilliant
blue. “It’s your eye I’ve been seeing in the mirror.” There was silence in the room. Harry and the barman
looked at each other. “You sent Dobby.” The barman nodded and looked around for the elf. “Thought he’d be with you. Where Ve you left him?” “He’s dead,” said Harry. “Bellatrix Lestrange killed
him.” The barman’s face was impassive. After a few
moments he said, “I’m sorry to hear it. I liked that
elf.” He turned away, lighting lamps with prods of his
wand, not looking at any of them. “You’re Aberforth,” said Harry to the man’s back. He neither confirmed nor denied it, but bent to light
the fire. “How did you get this?” Harry asked, walking across
to Sirius’s mirror, the twin of the one he had broken
nearly two years before. “Bought it from Dung ’bout a
year ago,” said Aberforth. “Albus told me what it was.
Been trying to keep an eye out for you.” Ron gasped.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“The silver doe!” he said excitedly. “Was that you too?” “What are you talking about?” said Aberforth. “Someone sent a doe Patronus to us!” “Brains like that, you could be a Death Eater, son.
Haven’t I just proved my Patronus is a goat?” “Oh,” said Ron. “Yeah ... well, I’m hungry!” he added
defensively as his stomach gave an enormous rumble. “I got food,” said Aberforth, and he sloped out of the
room, reappearing moments later with a large loaf of
bread, some cheese, and a pewter jug of mead, which
he set upon a small table in front of the fire. Ravenous, they ate and drank, and for a while there
was silence but for the crackle of the fire, the clink of
goblets, and the sound of chewing. “Right then,” said Aberforth when they had eaten
their fill, and Harry and Ron sat slumped dozily in
their chairs. “We need to think of the best way to get
you out of here. Can’t be done by night, you heard
what happens if anyone moves outdoors during
darkness: Caterwauling Charm’s set off, they’ll be
onto you like bow-truckles on doxy eggs. I don’t
reckon I’ll be able to pass off a stag as a goat a second
time. Wait for daybreak when curfew lifts, then you
can put your Cloak back on and set out on foot. Get
right out of Hogsmeade, up into the mountains, and
you’ll be able to Disapparate there. Might see Hagrid.
He’s been hiding in a cave up there with Grawp ever
since they tried to arrest him.” “We’re not leaving,” said Harry. “We need to get into
Hogwarts.” “Don’t be stupid, boy,” said Aberforth.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We’ve got to,” said Harry. “What you’ve got to do,” said Aberforth, leaning
forward, “is to get as far from here as you can.” “You don’t understand. There isn’t much time. We’ve
got to get into the castle. Dumbledore — I mean, your
brother — wanted us — ” The firelight made the grimy lenses of Aberforth ’s
glasses momentarily opaque, a bright flat white, and
Harry remembered the blind eyes of the giant spider,
Aragog. “My brother Albus wanted a lot of things,” said
Aberforth, “and people had a habit of getting hurt
while he was carrying out his grand plans. You get
away from this school, Potter, and out of the country
if you can. Forget my brother and his clever schemes.
He’s gone where none of this can hurt him, and you
don’t owe him anything.” “You don’t understand,” said Harry again. “Oh, don’t I?” said Aberforth quietly. “You don’t think
I understood my own brother? Think you knew Albus
better than I did?” “I didn’t mean that,” said Harry, whose brain felt
sluggish with exhaustion and from the surfeit of food
and wine. “It’s ... he left me a job.” “Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Nice job, I hope?
Pleasant? Easy? Sort of thing you’d expect an
unqualified wizard kid to be able to do without
overstretching themselves?” Ron gave a rather grim laugh. Hermione was looking
strained.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I-it’s not easy, no,” said Harry. “But I’ve got to — ” “ ‘Got to’? Why ‘got to*? He’s dead, isn’t he?” said
Aberforth roughly. “Let it go, boy, before you follow
him! Save yourself!” “I can’t.” “Why not?” “I — ” Harry felt overwhelmed; he could not explain, so
he took the offensive instead. “But you’re fighting too,
you’re in the Order of the Phoenix — ” “I was,” said Aberforth. “The Order of the Phoenix is
finished. You-Know-Who’s won, it’s over, and anyone
who’s pretending different’s kidding themselves. It’ll
never be safe for you here, Potter, he wants you too
badly. So go abroad, go into hiding, save yourself. Best take these two with you.” He jerked a thumb at
Ron and Hermione. “They’ll be in danger long as they
live now everyone knows they’ve been working with
you.” “I can’t leave,” said Harry. “I’ve got a job — ” “Give it to someone else!” “I can’t. It’s got to be me, Dumbledore explained it all “Oh, did he now? And did he tell you everything, was
he honest with you?” Harry wanted with all his heart to say “Yes,” but
somehow the simple word would not rise to his lips.
Aberforth seemed to know what he was thinking.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I knew my brother, Potter. He learned secrecy at our
mother’s knee. Secrets and lies, that’s how we grew
up, and Albus ... he was a natural.” The old man’s eyes traveled to the painting of the girl
over the mantelpiece. It was, now Harry looked
around properly, the only picture in the room. There
was no photograph of Albus Dumbledore, nor of
anyone else. “Mr. Dumbledore?” said Hermione rather timidly. “Is
that your sister? Ariana?” “Yes,” said Aberforth tersely. “Been reading Rita
Skeeter, have you, missy?” Even by the rosy light of the fire it was clear that
Hermione had turned red. “Elphias Doge mentioned her to us,” said Harry,
trying to spare Hermione. “That old berk,” muttered Aberforth, taking another
swig of mead. “Thought the sun shone out of my
brother’s every orifice, he did. Well, so did plenty of
people, you three included, by the looks of it.” Harry kept quiet. He did not want to express the
doubts and uncertainties about Dumbledore that had
riddled him for months now. He had made his choice
while he dug Dobby’s grave, he had decided to
continue along the winding, dangerous path indicated
for him by Albus Dumbledore, to accept that he had
not been told everything that he wanted to know, but
simply to trust. He had no desire to doubt again; he
did not want to hear anything that would deflect him
from his purpose. He met Aberforth ’s gaze, which was
so strikingly like his brother’s: The bright blue eyes
gave the same impression that they were X-raying the Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
object of their scrutiny, and Harry thought that
Aberforth knew what he was thinking and despised
him for it. “Professor Dumbledore cared about Harry, very
much,” said Hermione in a low voice. “Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Funny thing, how
many of the people my brother cared about very
much ended up in a worse state than if he’d left ’em
well alone.” “What do you mean?” asked Hermione breathlessly. “Never you mind,” said Aberforth. “But that’s a really serious thing to say!” said
Hermione. “Are you — are you talking about your
sister?” Aberforth glared at her: His lips moved as if he were
chewing the words he was holding back. Then he
burst into speech. “When my sister was six years old, she was attacked,
set upon, by three Muggle boys. They’d seen her
doing magic, spying through the back garden hedge:
She was a kid, she couldn’t control it, no witch or
wizard can at that age. What they saw scared them, I
expect. They forced their way through the hedge, and
when she couldn’t show them the trick, they got a bit
carried away trying to stop the little freak doing it.” Hermione ’s eyes were huge in the firelight; Ron looked
slightly sick. Aberforth stood up, tall as Albus, and
suddenly terrible in his anger and the intensity of his
pain.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“It destroyed her, what they did: She was never right
again. She wouldn’t use magic, but she couldn’t get
rid of it; it turned inward and drove her mad, it
exploded out of her when she couldn’t control it, and
at times she was strange and dangerous. But mostly
she was sweet and scared and harmless. “And my father went after the bastards that did it,”
said Aberforth, “and attacked them. And they locked
him up in Azkaban for it. He never said why he’d
done it, because if the Ministry had known what
Ariana had become, she’d have been locked up in St.
Mungo’s for good. They’d have seen her as a serious
threat to the International Statute of Secrecy,
unbalanced like she was, with magic exploding out of
her at moments when she couldn’t keep it in any
longer. “We had to keep her safe and quiet. We moved house,
put it about she was ill, and my mother looked after
her, and tried to keep her calm and happy. “I was her favorite,” he said, and as he said it, a
grubby schoolboy seemed to look out through
Aberforth’s wrinkles and tangled beard. “Not Albus,
he was always up in his bedroom when he was home,
reading his books and counting his prizes, keeping up
with his correspondence with ‘the most notable
magical names of the day,’ ” Aberforth sneered. “He
didn’t want to be bothered with her. She liked me
best. I could get her to eat when she wouldn’t do it for
my mother, I could get her to calm down when she
was in one of her rages, and when she was quiet, she
used to help me feed the goats. “Then, when she was fourteen ... See, I wasn’t there,”
said Aberforth. “If I’d been there, I could have calmed
her down. She had one of her rages, and my mother
wasn’t as young as she was, and ... it was an  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
accident. Ariana couldn’t control it. But my mother
was killed.” Harry felt a horrible mixture of pity and repulsion; he
did not want to hear any more, but Aberforth kept
talking, and Harry wondered how long it had been
since he had spoken about this; whether, in fact, he
had ever spoken about it. “So that put paid to Albus’s trip round the world with
little Doge. The pair of ’em came home for my
mother’s funeral and then Doge went off on his own,
and Albus settled down as head of the family. Ha!” Aberforth spat into the fire. “I’d have looked after her, I told him so, I didn’t care
about school, I’d have stayed home and done it. He
told me I had to finish my education and he’d take
over from my mother. Bit of a comedown for Mr.
Brilliant, there’s no prizes for looking after your half-
mad sister, stopping her blowing up the house every
other day. But he did all right for a few weeks . . . till
he came.” And now a positively dangerous look crept over
Aberforth’s face. “Grindelwald. And at last, my brother had an equal to
talk to, someone just as bright and talented as he
was. And looking after Ariana took a backseat then,
while they were hatching all their plans for a new
Wizarding order, and looking for Hallows, and
whatever else it was they were so interested in. Grand
plans for the benefit of all Wizardkind, and if one
young girl got neglected, what did that matter, when
Albus was working for the greater good?  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“But after a few weeks of it, I’d had enough, I had. It
was nearly time for me to go back to Hogwarts, so I
told ’em, both of ’em, face-to-face, like I am to you,
now,” and Aberforth looked down at Harry, and it
took little imagination to see him as a teenager, wiry
and angry, confronting his elder brother. “I told him,
you’d better give it up now. You can’t move her, she’s
in no fit state, you can’t take her with you, wherever it
is you’re planning to go, when you’re making your
clever speeches, trying to whip yourselves up a
following. He didn’t like that,” said Aberforth, and his
eyes were briefly occluded by the firelight on the
lenses of his glasses: They shone white and blind
again. “Grindelwald didn’t like that at all. He got
angry. He told me what a stupid little boy I was,
trying to stand in the way of him and my brilliant
brother. ... Didn’t I understand, my poor sister
wouldn’t have to be hidden once they’d changed the
world, and led the wizards out of hiding, and taught
the Muggles their place? “And there was an argument . . . and I pulled out my
wand, and he pulled out his, and I had the Cruciatus
Curse used on me by my brother’s best friend — and
Albus was trying to stop him, and then all three of us
were dueling, and the flashing lights and the bangs
set her off, she couldn’t stand it — ” The color was draining from Aberforth ’s face as
though he had suffered a mortal wound. “ — and I think she wanted to help, but she didn’t
really know what she was doing, and I don’t know
which of us did it, it could have been any of us — and
she was dead.” His voice broke on the last word and he dropped
down into the nearest chair. Hermione’s face was wet
with tears, and Ron was almost as pale as Aberforth.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry felt nothing but revulsion: He wished he had
not heard it, wished he could wash his mind clean of
it. “I’m so ... I’m so sorry,” Hermione whispered. “Gone,” croaked Aberforth. “Gone forever.” He wiped his nose on his cuff and cleared his throat. “ ’Course, Grindelwald scarpered. He had a bit of a
track record already, back in his own country, and he
didn’t want Ariana set to his account too. And Albus
was free, wasn’t he? Free of the burden of his sister,
free to become the greatest wizard of the — ” “He was never free,” said Harry. “I beg your pardon?” said Aberforth. “Never,” said Harry. “The night that your brother died,
he drank a potion that drove him out of his mind. He
started screaming, pleading with someone who wasn’t
there. ‘Don’t hurt them, please ... hurt me instead.’ ” Ron and Hermione were staring at Harry. He had
never gone into details about what had happened on
the island on the lake: The events that had taken
place after he and Dumbledore had returned to
Hogwarts had eclipsed it so thoroughly. “He thought he was back there with you and
Grindelwald, I know he did,” said Harry, remembering
Dumbledore whimpering, pleading. “He thought he
was watching Grindelwald hurting you and Ariana. . . .
It was torture to him, if you’d seen him then, you
wouldn’t say he was free.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Aberforth seemed lost in contemplation of his own
knotted and veined hands. After a long pause he said,
“How can you be sure, Potter, that my brother wasn’t
more interested in the greater good than in you? How
can you be sure you aren’t dispensable, just like my
little sister?” A shard of ice seemed to pierce Harry’s heart. “I don’t believe it. Dumbledore loved Harry,” said
Hermione. “Why didn’t he tell him to hide, then?” shot back
Aberforth. “Why didn’t he say to him, Take care of
yourself, here’s how to survive’?” “Because,” said Harry before Hermione could answer,
“sometimes you’ve got to think about more than your
own safety! Sometimes you’ve got to think about the
greater good! This is war!” “You’re seventeen, boy!” “I’m of age, and I’m going to keep fighting even if
you’ve given up!” “Who says I’ve given up?” “ The Order of the Phoenix is finished,’ ” Harry
repeated. “ Tou- Know- Who’s won, it’s over, and
anyone who’s pretending different’s kidding
themselves.’ ” “I don’t say I like it, but it’s the truth!” “No, it isn’t,” said Harry. “Your brother knew how to
finish You-Know-Who and he passed the knowledge
on to me. I’m going to keep going until I succeed — or  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
I die. Don’t think I don’t know how this might end.
I’ve known it for years.” He waited for Aberforth to jeer or to argue, but he did
not. He merely scowled. “We need to get into Hogwarts,” said Harry again. “If
you can’t help us, we’ll wait till daybreak, leave you in
peace, and try to find a way in ourselves. If you can
help us — well, now would be a great time to mention
it.” Aberforth remained fixed in his chair, gazing at Harry
with the eyes that were so extraordinarily like his
brother’s. At last he cleared his throat, got to his feet,
walked around the little table, and approached the
portrait of Ariana. “You know what to do,” he said. She smiled, turned, and walked away, not as people
in portraits usually did, out of the sides of their
frames, but along what seemed to be a long tunnel
painted behind her. They watched her slight figure
retreating until finally she was swallowed by the
darkness. “Er — what — ?” began Ron. “There’s only one way in now,” said Aberforth. “You
must know they’ve got all the old secret passageways
covered at both ends, dementors all around the
boundary walls, regular patrols inside the school from
what my sources tell me. The place has never been so
heavily guarded. How you expect to do anything once
you get inside it, with Snape in charge and the
Carrows as his deputies ... well, that’s your lookout,
isn’t it? You say you’re prepared to die.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“But what ... ?” said Hermione, frowning at Ariana’s
picture. A tiny white dot had reappeared at the end of the
painted tunnel, and now Ariana was walking back
toward them, growing bigger and bigger as she came.
But there was somebody else with her now, someone
taller than she was, who was limping along, looking
excited. His hair was longer than Harry had ever seen
it: He appeared to have suffered several gashes to his
face and his clothes were ripped and torn. Larger and
larger the two figures grew, until only their heads and
shoulders filled the portrait. Then the whole thing
swung forward on the wall like a little door, and the
entrance to a real tunnel was revealed. And out of it,
his hair overgrown, his face cut, his robes ripped,
clambered the real Neville Longbottom, who gave a
roar of delight, leapt down from the mantelpiece, and
yelled, “I knew you’d come! I knew it, HarryY’  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE LOST DIADEM “Neville — what the — how — ?” But Neville had spotted Ron and Hermione, and with
yells of delight was hugging them too. The longer
Harry looked at Neville, the worse he appeared: One
of his eyes was swollen yellow and purple, there were
gouge marks on his face, and his general air of
unkemptness suggested that he had been living
rough. Nevertheless, his battered visage shone with
happiness as he let go of Hermione and said again, “I
knew you’d come! Kept telling Seamus it was a matter
of time!” “Neville, what’s happened to you?” “What? This?” Neville dismissed his injuries with a
shake of the head. “This is nothing. Seamus is worse.
You’ll see. Shall we get going then? Oh,” he turned to
Aberforth, “Ab, there might be a couple more people
on the way.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling “Couple more?” repeated Aberforth ominously. “What
d’you mean, a couple more, Longbottom? There’s a
curfew and a Caterwauling Charm on the whole
village!” “I know, that’s why they’ll be Apparating directly into
the bar,” said Neville. “Just send them down the
passage when they get here, will you? Thanks a lot.” Neville held out his hand to Hermione and helped her
to climb up onto the mantelpiece and into the tunnel;
Ron followed, then Neville. Harry addressed
Aberforth. “I don’t know how to thank you. You’ve saved our
lives twice.” “Look after ’em, then,” said Aberforth gruffly. “I might
not be able to save ’em a third time.” Harry clambered up onto the mantelpiece and
through the hole behind Ariana’s portrait. There were
smooth stone steps on the other side: It looked as
though the passageway had been there for years.
Brass lamps hung from the walls and the earthy floor
was worn and smooth; as they walked, their shadows
rippled, fanlike, across the wall. “How long’s this been here?” Ron asked as they set
off. “It isn’t on the Marauder’s Map, is it, Harry? I
thought there were only seven passages in and out of
school?” “They sealed off all of those before the start of the
year,” said Neville. “There’s no chance of getting
through any of them now, not with curses over the
entrances and Death Eaters and dementors waiting at
the exits.” He started walking backward, beaming,
drinking them in. “Never mind that stuff. ... Is it true? Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Did you break into Gringotts? Did you escape on a
dragon? It’s everywhere, everyone’s talking about it,
Terry Boot got beaten up by Carrow for yelling about
it in the Great Hall at dinner!” “Yeah, it’s true,” said Harry. Neville laughed gleefully. “What did you do with the dragon?” “Released it into the wild,” said Ron. “Hermione was
all for keeping it as a pet — ” “Don’t exaggerate, Ron — ” “But what have you been doing? People have been
saying you’ve just been on the run, Harry, but I don’t
think so. I think you’ve been up to something.” “You’re right,” said Harry, “but tell us about
Hogwarts, Neville, we haven’t heard anything.” “It’s been ... well, it’s not really like Hogwarts
anymore,” said Neville, the smile fading from his face
as he spoke. “Do you know about the Carrows?” “Those two Death Eaters who teach here?” “They do more than teach,” said Neville. “They’re in
charge of all discipline. They like punishment, the
Carrows.” “Like Umbridge?” “Nah, they make her look tame. The other teachers
are all supposed to refer us to the Carrows if we do
anything wrong. They don’t, though, if they can avoid
it. You can tell they all hate them as much as we do.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Amycus, the bloke, he teaches what used to be
Defense Against the Dark Arts, except now it’s just
the Dark Arts. We’re supposed to practice the
Cruciatus Curse on people who’ve earned detentions “What?” Harry, Ron, and Hermione’s united voices echoed up
and down the passage. “Yeah,” said Neville. “That’s how I got this one,” he
pointed at a particularly deep gash in his cheek, “I
refused to do it. Some people are into it, though;
Crabbe and Goyle love it. First time they’ve ever been
top in anything, I expect. “Alecto, Amycus’s sister, teaches Muggle Studies,
which is compulsory for everyone. We’ve all got to
listen to her explain how Muggles are like animals,
stupid and dirty, and how they drove wizards into
hiding by being vicious toward them, and how the
natural order is being reestablished. I got this one,”
he indicated another slash to his face, “for asking her
how much Muggle blood she and her brother have
got.” “Blimey, Neville,” said Ron, “there’s a time and a place
for getting a smart mouth.” “You didn’t hear her,” said Neville. “You wouldn’t have
stood it either. The thing is, it helps when people
stand up to them, it gives everyone hope. I used to
notice that when you did it, Harry.” “But they’ve used you as a knife sharpener,” said
Ron, wincing slightly as they passed a lamp and
Neville’s injuries were thrown into even greater relief.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Neville shrugged. “Doesn’t matter. They don’t want to spill too much
pure blood, so they’ll torture us a bit if we’re mouthy
but they won’t actually kill us.” Harry did not know what was worse, the things that
Neville was saying or the matter-of-fact tone in which
he said them. “The only people in real danger are the ones whose
friends and relatives on the outside are giving trouble.
They get taken hostage. Old Xeno Lovegood was
getting a bit too outspoken in The Quihhler, so they
dragged Luna off the train on the way back for
Christmas.” “Neville, she’s all right, we’ve seen her — ” “Yeah, I know, she managed to get a message to me.” From his pocket he pulled a golden coin, and Harry
recognized it as one of the fake Galleons that
Dumbledore’s Army had used to send one another
messages. “These have been great,” said Neville, beaming at
Hermione. “The Carrows never rumbled how we were
communicating, it drove them mad. We used to sneak
out at night and put graffiti on the walls: Dumbledore’s Army, Still Recruiting, stuff like that.
Snape hated it.” “You used to?” said Harry, who had noticed the past
tense. “Well, it got more difficult as time went on,” said
Neville. “We lost Luna at Christmas, and Ginny never
came back after Easter, and the three of us were sort  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
of the leaders. The Carrows seemed to know I was
behind a lot of it, so they started coming down on me
hard, and then Michael Corner went and got caught
releasing a first-year they’d chained up, and they
tortured him pretty badly. That scared people off.” “No kidding,” muttered Ron, as the passage began to
slope upward. “Yeah, well, I couldn’t ask people to go through what
Michael did, so we dropped those kinds of stunts. But
we were still fighting, doing underground stuff, right
up until a couple of weeks ago. That’s when they
decided there was only one way to stop me, I suppose,
and they went for Gran.” “They what?” said Harry, Ron, and Hermione
together. “Yeah,” said Neville, panting a little now, because the
passage was climbing so steeply, “well, you can see
their thinking. It had worked really well, kidnapping
kids to force their relatives to behave, I s’pose it was
only a matter of time before they did it the other way
around. Thing was,” he faced them, and Harry was
astonished to see that he was grinning, “they bit off a
bit more than they could chew with Gran. Little old
witch living alone, they probably thought they didn’t
need to send anyone particularly powerful. Anyway,”
Neville laughed, “Dawlish is still in St. Mungo’s and
Gran’s on the run. She sent me a letter,” he clapped a
hand to the breast pocket of his robes, “telling me she
was proud of me, that I’m my parents’ son, and to
keep it up.” “Cool,” said Ron. “Yeah,” said Neville happily. “Only thing was, once
they realized they had no hold over me, they decided  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Hogwarts could do without me after all. I don’t know
whether they were planning to kill me or send me to
Azkaban; either way, I knew it was time to disappear.” “But,” said Ron, looking thoroughly confused, “aren’t
— aren’t we heading straight back into Hogwarts?” “ ’Course,” said Neville. “You’ll see. We’re here.” They turned a corner and there ahead of them was
the end of the passage. Another short flight of steps
led to a door just like the one hidden behind Ariana’s
portrait. Neville pushed it open and climbed through.
As Harry followed, he heard Neville call out to unseen
people: “Look who it is! Didn’t I tell you?” As Harry emerged into the room beyond the passage,
there were several screams and yells: “HARRY!” “It’s
Potter, it’s POTTER!” “Ron!” “Hermionel” He had a confused impression of colored hangings, of
lamps and many faces. The next moment, he, Ron,
and Hermione were engulfed, hugged, pounded on the
back, their hair ruffled, their hands shaken, by what
seemed to be more than twenty people: They might
just have won a Quidditch final. “Okay, okay, calm down!” Neville called, and as the
crowd backed away, Harry was able to take in their
surroundings. He did not recognize the room at all. It was enormous,
and looked rather like the interior of a particularly
sumptuous tree house, or perhaps a gigantic ship’s
cabin. Multicolored hammocks were strung from the
ceiling and from a balcony that ran around the dark
wood-paneled and windowless walls, which were Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
covered in bright tapestry hangings: Harry saw the
gold Gryffindor lion, emblazoned on scarlet; the black
badger of Hufflepuff, set against yellow; and the
bronze eagle of Ravenclaw, on blue. The silver and
green of Slytherin alone were absent. There were
bulging bookcases, a few broomsticks propped
against the walls, and in the corner, a large wooden-
cased wireless. “Where are we?” “Room of Requirement, of course!” said Neville.
“Surpassed itself, hasn’t it? The Carrows were
chasing me, and I knew I had just one chance for a
hideout: I managed to get through the door and this
is what I found! Well, it wasn’t exactly like this when I
arrived, it was a load smaller, there was only one
hammock and just Gryffindor hangings. But it’s
expanded as more and more of the D.A. have arrived.” “And the Carrows can’t get in?” asked Harry, looking
around for the door. “No,” said Seamus Finnigan, whom Harry had not
recognized until he spoke: Seamus’s face was bruised
and puffy. “It’s a proper hideout, as long as one of us
stays in here, they can’t get at us, the door won’t
open. It’s all down to Neville. He really gets this room.
You’ve got to ask it for exactly what you need — like, ‘I don’t want any Carrow supporters to be able to get
in’ — and it’ll do it for you! You’ve just got to make
sure you close the loopholes! Neville’s the man!” “It’s quite straightforward, really,” said Neville
modestly. “I’d been in here about a day and a half,
and getting really hungry, and wishing I could get
something to eat, and that’s when the passage to the
Hog’s Head opened up. I went through it and met
Aberforth. He’s been providing us with food, because Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
for some reason, that’s the one thing the room doesn’t
really do.” “Yeah, well, food’s one of the five exceptions to
Gamp’s Law of Elemental Transfiguration,” said Ron
to general astonishment. “So we’ve been hiding out here for nearly two weeks,”
said Seamus, “and it just makes more hammocks
every time we need them, and it even sprouted a
pretty good bathroom once girls started turning up — “ — and thought they’d quite like to wash, yes,”
supplied Lavender Brown, whom Harry had not
noticed until that point. Now that he looked around
properly, he recognized many familiar faces. Both
Patil twins were there, as were Terry Boot, Ernie
Macmillan, Anthony Goldstein, and Michael Corner. “Tell us what you’ve been up to, though,” said Ernie.
“There’ve been so many rumors, we’ve been trying to
keep up with you on Potterwatch.” He pointed at the
wireless. “You didn’t break into Gringotts?” “They did!” said Neville. “And the dragon’s true too!” There was a smattering of applause and a few
whoops; Ron took a bow. “What were you after?” asked Seamus eagerly. Before any of them could parry the question with one
of their own, Harry felt a terrible, scorching pain in
the lightning scar. As he turned his back hastily on
the curious and delighted faces, the Room of
Requirement vanished, and he was standing inside a
ruined stone shack, and the rotting floorboards were
ripped apart at his feet, a disinterred golden box lay Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
open and empty beside the hole, and Voldemort’s
scream of fury vibrated inside his head. With an enormous effort he pulled out of Voldemort’s
mind again, back to where he stood, swaying, in the
Room of Requirement, sweat pouring from his face
and Ron holding him up. “Are you all right, Harry?” Neville was saying. “Want
to sit down? I expect you’re tired, aren’t — ?” “No,” said Harry. He looked at Ron and Hermione,
trying to tell them without words that Voldemort had
just discovered the loss of one of the other Horcruxes.
Time was running out fast: If Voldemort chose to visit
Hogwarts next, they would miss their chance. “We need to get going,” he said, and their expressions
told him that they understood. “What are we going to do, then, Harry?” asked
Seamus. “What’s the plan?” “Plan?” repeated Harry. He was exercising all his
willpower to prevent himself succumbing again to
Voldemort’s rage: His scar was still burning. “Well,
there’s something we — Ron, Hermione, and I — need
to do, and then we’ll get out of here.” Nobody was laughing or whooping anymore. Neville
looked confused. “What d’you mean, ‘get out of here’?” “We haven’t come back to stay,” said Harry, rubbing
his scar, trying to soothe the pain. “There’s something
important we need to do — ” “What is it?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I — I can’t tell you.” There was a ripple of muttering at this: Neville’s
brows contracted. “Why can’t you tell us? It’s something to do with
fighting You-Know-Who, right?” “Well, yeah — ” “Then we’ll help you.” The other members of Dumbledore’s Army were
nodding, some enthusiastically, others solemnly. A
couple of them rose from their chairs to demonstrate
their willingness for immediate action. “You don’t understand.” Harry seemed to have said
that a lot in the last few hours. “We — we can’t tell
you. We’ve got to do it — alone.” “Why?” asked Neville. “Because ...” In his desperation to start looking for
the missing Horcrux, or at least to have a private
discussion with Ron and Hermione about where they
might commence their search, Harry found it difficult
to gather his thoughts. His scar was still searing.
“Dumbledore left the three of us a job,” he said
carefully, “and we weren’t supposed to tell — I mean,
he wanted us to do it, just the three of us.” “We’re his army,” said Neville. “Dumbledore’s Army.
We were all in it together, we’ve been keeping it going
while you three have been off on your own — ” “It hasn’t exactly been a picnic, mate,” said Ron.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I never said it had, but I don’t see why you can’t
trust us. Everyone in this room’s been fighting and
they’ve been driven in here because the Carrows were
hunting them down. Everyone in here’s proven they’re
loyal to Dumbledore — loyal to you.” “Look,” Harry began, without knowing what he was
going to say, but it did not matter: The tunnel door
had just opened behind him. “We got your message, Neville! Hello you three, I
thought you must be here!” It was Luna and Dean. Seamus gave a great roar of
delight and ran to hug his best friend. “Hi, everyone!” said Luna happily. “Oh, it’s great to be
back!” “Luna,” said Harry distractedly, “what are you doing
here? How did you — ?” “I sent for her,” said Neville, holding up the fake
Galleon. “I promised her and Ginny that if you turned
up I’d let them know. We all thought that if you came
back, it would mean revolution. That we were going to
overthrow Snape and the Carrows.” “Of course that’s what it means,” said Luna brightly.
“Isn’t it, Harry? We’re going to fight them out of
Hogwarts?” “Listen,” said Harry with a rising sense of panic, “I’m
sorry, but that’s not what we came back for. There’s
something we’ve got to do, and then — ” “You’re going to leave us in this mess?” demanded
Michael Corner.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“No!” said Ron. “What we’re doing will benefit
everyone in the end, it’s all about trying to get rid of
You-Know-Who — ” “Then let us help!” said Neville angrily. “We want to be
a part of it!” There was another noise behind them, and Harry
turned. His heart seemed to fail: Ginny was now
climbing through the hole in the wall, closely followed
by Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Ginny gave Harry a
radiant smile: He had forgotten, or had never fully
appreciated, how beautiful she was, but he had never
been less pleased to see her. “Aberforth’s getting a bit annoyed,” said Fred, raising
his hand in answer to several cries of greeting. “He
wants a kip, and his bar’s turned into a railway
station.” Harry’s mouth fell open. Right behind Lee Jordan
came Harry’s old girlfriend, Cho Chang. She smiled at
him. “I got the message,” she said, holding up her own fake
Galleon, and she walked over to sit beside Michael
Corner. “So what’s the plan, Harry?” said George. “There isn’t one,” said Harry, still disoriented by the
sudden appearance of all these people, unable to take
everything in while his scar was still burning so
fiercely. “Just going to make it up as we go along, are we? My
favorite kind,” said Fred.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You’ve got to stop this!” Harry told Neville. “What did
you call them all back for? This is insane — ” “We’re fighting, aren’t we?” said Dean, taking out his
fake Galleon. “The message said Harry was back, and
we were going to fight! I’ll have to get a wand, though “You haven’t got a wand — ?” began Seamus. Ron turned suddenly to Harry. “Why can’t they help?” “What?” “They can help.” He dropped his voice and said, so
that none of them could hear but Hermione, who
stood between them, “We don’t know where it is.
We’ve got to find it fast. We don’t have to tell them it’s
a Horcrux.” Harry looked from Ron to Hermione, who murmured,
“I think Ron’s right. We don’t even know what we’re
looking for, we need them.” And when Harry looked
unconvinced, “You don’t have to do everything alone,
Harry.” Harry thought fast, his scar still prickling, his head
threatening to split again. Dumbledore had warned
him against telling anyone but Ron and Hermione
about the Horcruxes. Secrets and lies, that’s how we
grew up, and Albus ...he was a natural. ... Was he
turning into Dumbledore, keeping his secrets
clutched to his chest, afraid to trust? But
Dumbledore had trusted Snape, and where had that
led? To murder at the top of the highest tower ...  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“All right,” he said quietly to the other two. “Okay,” he
called to the room at large, and all noise ceased: Fred
and George, who had been cracking jokes for the
benefit of those nearest, fell silent, and all of them
looked alert, excited. “There’s something we need to find,” Harry said.
“Something — something that’ll help us overthrow
You-Know-Who. It’s here at Hogwarts, but we don’t
know where. It might have belonged to Ravenclaw. Has anyone heard of an object like that? Has anyone
ever come across something with her eagle on it, for
instance?” He looked hopefully toward the little group of
Ravenclaws, to Padma, Michael, Terry, and Cho, but
it was Luna who answered, perched on the arm of
Ginny’s chair. “Well, there’s her lost diadem. I told you about it,
remember, Harry? The lost diadem of Ravenclaw?
Daddy’s trying to duplicate it.” “Yeah, but the lost diadem,” said Michael Corner,
rolling his eyes, “is lost, Luna. That’s sort of the
point.” “When was it lost?” asked Harry. “Centuries ago, they say,” said Cho, and Harry’s heart
sank. “Professor Flitwick says the diadem vanished
with Ravenclaw herself. People have looked, but,” she
appealed to her fellow Ravenclaws, “nobody’s ever
found a trace of it, have they?” They all shook their heads. “Sorry, but what is a diadem?” asked Ron.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“It’s a kind of crown,” said Terry Boot. “Ravenclaw’s
was supposed to have magical properties, enhance
the wisdom of the wearer.” “Yes, Daddy’s Wrackspurt siphons — ” But Harry cut across Luna. “And none of you have ever seen anything that looks
like it?” They all shook their heads again. Harry looked at Ron
and Hermione and his own disappointment was
mirrored back at him. An object that had been lost
this long, and apparently without trace, did not seem
like a good candidate for the Horcrux hidden in the
castle. ... Before he could formulate a new question,
however, Cho spoke again. “If you’d like to see what the diadem’s supposed to
look like, I could take you up to our common room
and show you, Harry? Ravenclaw’s wearing it in her
statue.” Harry’s scar scorched again: For a moment the Room
of Requirement swam before him, and he saw instead
the dark earth soaring beneath him and felt the great
snake wrapped around his shoulders. Voldemort was
flying again, whether to the underground lake or here,
to the castle, he did not know: Either way, there was
hardly any time left. “He’s on the move,” he said quietly to Ron and
Hermione. He glanced at Cho and then back at them.
“Listen, I know it’s not much of a lead, but I’m going
to go and look at this statue, at least find out what
the diadem looks like. Wait for me here and keep, you
know — the other one — safe.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Cho had got to her feet, but Ginny said rather
fiercely, “No, Luna will take Harry, won’t you, Luna?” “Oooh, yes, I’d like to,” said Luna happily, and Cho
sat down again, looking disappointed. “How do we get out?” Harry asked Neville. “Over here.” He led Harry and Luna to a corner, where a small
cupboard opened onto a steep staircase. “It comes out somewhere different every day, so
they’ve never been able to find it,” he said. “Only
trouble is, we never know exactly where we’re going to
end up when we go out. Be careful, Harry, they’re
always patrolling the corridors at night.” “No problem,” said Harry. “See you in a bit.” He and Luna hurried up the staircase, which was
long, lit by torches, and turned corners in unexpected
places. At last they reached what appeared to be solid
wall. “Get under here,” Harry told Luna, pulling out the
Invisibility Cloak and throwing it over both of them. He gave the wall a little push. It melted away at his touch and they slipped outside:
Harry glanced back and saw that it had resealed itself
at once. They were standing in a dark corridor: Harry
pulled Luna back into the shadows, fumbled in the
pouch around his neck, and took out the Marauder’s
Map. Holding it close to his nose he searched, and
located his and Luna’s dots at last.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We’re up on the fifth floor,” he whispered, watching
Filch moving away from them, a corridor ahead.
“Come on, this way.” They crept off. Harry had prowled the castle at night many times
before, but never had his heart hammered this fast,
never had so much depended on his safe passage
through the place. Through squares of moonlight
upon the floor, past suits of armor whose helmets
creaked at the sound of their soft footsteps, around
corners beyond which who knew what lurked, Harry
and Luna walked, checking the Marauder’s Map
whenever light permitted, twice pausing to allow a
ghost to pass without drawing attention to
themselves. He expected to encounter an obstacle at
any moment; his worst fear was Peeves, and he
strained his ears with every step to hear the first,
telltale signs of the poltergeist’s approach. “This way, Harry,” breathed Luna, plucking his sleeve
and pulling him toward a spiral staircase. They climbed in tight, dizzying circles; Harry had
never been up here before. At last they reached a
door. There was no handle and no keyhole: nothing
but a plain expanse of aged wood, and a bronze
knocker in the shape of an eagle. Luna reached out a pale hand, which looked eerie
floating in midair, unconnected to arm or body. She
knocked once, and in the silence it sounded to Harry
like a cannon blast. At once the beak of the eagle
opened, but instead of a bird’s call, a soft, musical
voice said, “Which came first, the phoenix or the
flame?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Hmm . . . What do you think, Harry?” said Luna,
looking thoughtful. “What? Isn’t there just a password?” “Oh no, you’ve got to answer a question,” said Luna. “What if you get it wrong?” “Well, you have to wait for somebody who gets it
right,” said Luna. “That way you learn, you see?” “Yeah ... Trouble is, we can’t really afford to wait for
anyone else, Luna.” “No, I see what you mean,” said Luna seriously. “Well
then, I think the answer is that a circle has no
beginning.” “Well reasoned,” said the voice, and the door swung
open. The deserted Ravenclaw common room was a wide,
circular room, airier than any Harry had ever seen at
Hogwarts. Graceful arched windows punctuated the
walls, which were hung with blue-and-bronze silks: By day, the Ravenclaws would have a spectacular
view of the surrounding mountains. The ceiling was
domed and painted with stars, which were echoed in
the midnight-blue carpet. There were tables, chairs,
and bookcases, and in a niche opposite the door
stood a tall statue of white marble. Harry recognized Rowena Ravenclaw from the bust he
had seen at Luna’s house. The statue stood beside a
door that led, he guessed, to dormitories above. He
strode right up to the marble woman, and she seemed
to look back at him with a quizzical half smile on her
face, beautiful yet slightly intimidating. A delicate-
P a g e |  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
looking circlet had been reproduced in marble on top
of her head. It was not unlike the tiara Fleur had
worn at her wedding. There were tiny words etched
into it. Harry stepped out from under the Cloak and
climbed up onto Ravenclaw’s plinth to read them. “ ‘Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasure.’ ” “Which makes you pretty skint, witless,” said a
cackling voice. Harry whirled around, slipped off the plinth, and
landed on the floor. The sloping-shouldered figure of
Alecto Carrow was standing before him, and even as
Harry raised his wand, she pressed a stubby
forefinger to the skull and snake branded on her
forearm.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE SACKING OF SEVERUS SNAPE The moment her finger touched the Mark, Harry’s
scar burned savagely, the starry room vanished from
sight, and he was standing upon an outcrop of rock
beneath a cliff, and the sea was washing around him
and there was triumph in his heart — They have the
boy. A loud bang brought Harry back to where he stood:
Disoriented, he raised his wand, but the witch before
him was already falling forward; she hit the ground so
hard that the glass in the bookcases tinkled. “I’ve never Stunned anyone except in our D.A.
lessons,” said Luna, sounding mildly interested. “That
was noisier than I thought it would be.” And sure enough, the ceiling had begun to tremble.
Scurrying, echoing footsteps were growing louder
from behind the door leading to the dormitories:
Luna’s spell had woken Ravenclaws sleeping above. “Luna, where are you? I need to get under the Cloak!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling Luna’s feet appeared out of nowhere; he hurried to
her side and she let the Cloak fall back over them as
the door opened and a stream of Ravenclaws, all in
their nightclothes, flooded into the common room.
There were gasps and cries of surprise as they saw
Alecto lying there unconscious. Slowly they shuffled
in around her, a savage beast that might wake at any
moment and attack them. Then one brave little first-
year darted up to her and prodded her backside with
his big toe. “I think she might be dead!” he shouted with delight. “Oh, look,” whispered Luna happily, as the
Ravenclaws crowded in around Alecto. “They’re
pleased!” “Yeah ... great ...” Harry closed his eyes, and as his scar throbbed he
chose to sink again into Voldemort’s mind. ... He was
moving along the tunnel into the first cave. ... He had
chosen to make sure of the locket before coming . . .
but that would not take him long. . . . There was a rap on the common room door and every
Ravenclaw froze. From the other side, Harry heard the
soft, musical voice that issued from the eagle door
knocker: “Where do Vanished objects go?” “I dunno, do I? Shut it!” snarled an uncouth voice
that Harry knew was that of the Carrow brother,
Amycus. “Alecto? Alecto? Are you there? Have you got
him? Open the door!” The Ravenclaws were whispering amongst
themselves, terrified. Then, without warning, there
came a series of loud bangs, as though somebody was
firing a gun into the door.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ALECTO\ If he comes, and we haven’t got Potter —
d’you want to go the same way as the Malfoys?
ANSWER ME!” Amyous bellowed, shaking the door for
all he was worth, but still it did not open. The
Ravenclaws were all backing away, and some of the
most frightened began scampering back up the
staircase to their beds. Then, just as Harry was
wondering whether he ought not to blast open the
door and Stun Amycus before the Death Eater could
do anything else, a second, most familiar voice rang
out beyond the door. “May I ask what you are doing, Professor Carrow?” “Trying — to get — through this damned — door!”
shouted Amycus. “Go and get Flitwick! Get him to
open it, now!” “But isn’t your sister in there?” asked Professor
McGonagall. “Didn’t Professor Flitwick let her in
earlier this evening, at your urgent request? Perhaps
she could open the door for you? Then you needn’t
wake up half the castle.” “She ain’t answering, you old besom! You open it!
Garn! Do it, now! “Certainly, if you wish it,” said Professor McGonagall,
with awful coldness. There was a genteel tap of the
knocker and the musical voice asked again, “Where do Vanished objects go?” “Into nonbeing, which is to say, everything,” replied
Professor McGonagall. “Nicely phrased,” replied the eagle door knocker, and
the door swung open.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The few Ravenclaws who had remained behind
sprinted for the stairs as Amycus burst over the
threshold, brandishing his wand. Hunched like his
sister, he had a pallid, doughy face and tiny eyes,
which fell at once on Alecto, sprawled motionless on
the floor. He let out a yell of fury and fear. “What’ve they done, the little whelps?” he screamed.
“I’ll Cruciate the lot of ’em till they tell me who did it
— and what’s the Dark Lord going to say?” he
shrieked, standing over his sister and smacking
himself on the forehead with his fist. “We haven’t got
him, and they’ve gorn and killed her!” “She’s only Stunned,” said Professor McGonagall
impatiently, who had stooped down to examine
Alecto. “She’ll be perfectly all right.” “No she bludgering well won’t!” bellowed Amycus. “Not
after the Dark Lord gets hold of her! She’s gorn and
sent for him, I felt me Mark burn, and he thinks we’ve
got Potter!” “ ‘Got Potter’?” said Professor McGonagall sharply.
“What do you mean, ‘got Potter’?” “He told us Potter might try and get inside Ravenclaw
Tower, and to send for him if we caught him!” “Why would Harry Potter try to get inside Ravenclaw
Tower? Potter belongs in my House!” Beneath the disbelief and anger, Harry heard a little
strain of pride in her voice, and affection for Minerva
McGonagall gushed up inside him. “We was told he might come in here!” said Carrow. “I
dunno why, do I?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Professor McGonagall stood up and her beady eyes
swept the room. Twice they passed right over the
place where Harry and Luna stood. “We can push it off on the kids,” said Amycus, his
piglike face suddenly crafty. “Yeah, that’s what we’ll
do. Well say Alecto was ambushed by the kids, them
kids up there” — he looked up at the starry ceiling
toward the dormitories — “and we’ll say they forced
her to press her Mark, and that’s why he got a false
alarm. ... He can punish them. Couple of kids more or
less, what’s the difference?” “Only the difference between truth and lies, courage
and cowardice,” said Professor McGonagall, who had
turned pale, “a difference, in short, which you and
your sister seem unable to appreciate. But let me
make one thing very clear. You are not going to pass
off your many ineptitudes on the students of
Hogwarts. I shall not permit it.” “Excuse me?” Amycus moved forward until he was offensively close
to Professor McGonagall, his face within inches of
hers. She refused to back away, but looked down at
him as if he were something disgusting she had found
stuck to a lavatory seat. “It’s not a case of what you’ll permit, Minerva
McGonagall. Your time’s over. It’s us what’s in charge
here now, and you’ll back me up or you’ll pay the
price.” And he spat in her face. Harry pulled the Cloak off himself, raised his wand,
and said, “You shouldn’t have done that.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
As Amycus spun around, Harry shouted, “Crucio\” The Death Eater was lifted off his feet. He writhed
through the air like a drowning man, thrashing and
howling in pain, and then, with a crunch and a
shattering of glass, he smashed into the front of a
bookcase and crumpled, insensible, to the floor. “I see what Bellatrix meant,” said Harry, the blood
thundering through his brain, “you need to really
mean it.” “Potter!” whispered Professor McGonagall, clutching
her heart. “Potter — you’re here! What — ? How — ?”
She struggled to pull herself together. “Potter, that
was foolish!” “He spat at you,” said Harry. “Potter, I — that was very — very gallant of you — but
don’t you realize — ?” “Yeah, I do,” Harry assured her. Somehow her panic
steadied him. “Professor McGonagall, Voldemort’s on
the way.” “Oh, are we allowed to say the name now?” asked
Luna with an air of interest, pulling off the Invisibility
Cloak. This appearance of a second outlaw seemed to
overwhelm Professor McGonagall, who staggered
backward and fell into a nearby chair, clutching at
the neck of her old tartan dressing gown. “I don’t think it makes any difference what we call
him,” Harry told Luna. “He already knows where I
am.” In a distant part of Harry’s brain, that part connected
to the angry, burning scar, he could see Voldemort  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
sailing fast over the dark lake in the ghostly green
boat. ... He had nearly reached the island where the
stone basin stood. ... “You must flee,” whispered Professor McGonagall.
“Now, Potter, as quickly as you can!” “I can’t,” said Harry. “There’s something I need to do.
Professor, do you know where the diadem of
Ravenclaw is?” “The d-diadem of Ravenclaw? Of course not — hasn’t
it been lost for centuries?” She sat up a little
straighter. “Potter, it was madness, utter madness,
for you to enter this castle — ” “I had to,” said Harry. “Professor, there’s something
hidden here that I’m supposed to find, and it could be
the diadem — if I could just speak to Professor
Flitwick — ” There was a sound of movement, of clinking glass:
Amycus was coming round. Before Harry or Luna
could act, Professor McGonagall rose to her feet,
pointed her wand at the groggy Death Eater, and
said, “Imperio.” Amycus got up, walked over to his sister, picked up
her wand, then shuffled obediently to Professor
McGonagall and handed it over along with his own.
Then he lay down on the floor beside Alecto. Professor
McGonagall waved her wand again, and a length of
shimmering silver rope appeared out of thin air and
snaked around the Carrows, binding them tightly
together. “Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, turning to face
him again with superb indifference to the Carrows’  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
predicament, “if He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named does
indeed know that you are here — ” As she said it, a wrath that was like physical pain
blazed through Harry, setting his scar on fire, and for
a second he looked down upon a basin whose potion
had turned clear, and saw that no golden locket lay
safe beneath the surface — “Potter, are you all right?” said a voice, and Harry
came back: He was clutching Luna’s shoulder to
steady himself. “Time’s running out, Voldemort’s getting nearer.
Professor, I’m acting on Dumbledore’s orders, I must
find what he wanted me to find! But we’ve got to get
the students out while I’m searching the castle — it’s
me Voldemort wants, but he won’t care about killing a
few more or less, not now — ” not now he knows I’m
attacking Horcruxes, Harry finished the sentence in
his head. “You’re acting on Dumbledore’s orders?” she repeated
with a look of dawning wonder. Then she drew herself
up to her fullest height. “We shall secure the school against He-Who-Must-
Not-Be-Named while you search for this — this
object.” “Is that possible?” “I think so,” said Professor McGonagall dryly, “we
teachers are rather good at magic, you know. I am
sure we will be able to hold him off for a while if we all
put our best efforts into it. Of course, something will
have to be done about Professor Snape — ” “Let me — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ — and if Hogwarts is about to enter a state of siege,
with the Dark Lord at the gates, it would indeed be
advisable to take as many innocent people out of the
way as possible. With the Floo Network under
observation, and Apparition impossible within the
grounds — ” “There’s a way,” said Harry quickly, and he explained
about the passageway leading into the Hog’s Head. “Potter, we’re talking about hundreds of students — ” “I know, Professor, but if Voldemort and the Death
Eaters are concentrating on the school boundaries
they won’t be interested in anyone who’s
Disapparating out of the Hog’s Head.” “There’s something in that,” she agreed. She pointed
her wand at the Carrows, and a silver net fell upon
their bound bodies, tied itself around them, and
hoisted them into the air, where they dangled beneath
the blue-and-gold ceiling like two large, ugly sea
creatures. “Come. We must alert the other Heads of
House. You’d better put that Cloak back on.” She marched toward the door, and as she did so she
raised her wand. From the tip burst three silver cats
with spectacle markings around their eyes. The
Patronuses ran sleekly ahead, filling the spiral
staircase with silvery light, as Professor McGonagall,
Harry, and Luna hurried back down. Along the corridors they raced, and one by one the
Patronuses left them; Professor McGonagall’s tartan
dressing gown rustled over the floor, and Harry and
Luna jogged behind her under the Cloak. They had descended two more floors when another
set of quiet footsteps joined theirs. Harry, whose scar  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
was still prickling, heard them first: He felt in the
pouch around his neck for the Marauder’s Map, but
before he could take it out, McGonagall too seemed to
become aware of their company. She halted, raised
her wand ready to duel, and said, “Who’s there?” “It is I,” said a low voice. From behind a suit of armor stepped Severus Snape. Hatred boiled up in Harry at the sight of him: He had
forgotten the details of Snape ’s appearance in the
magnitude of his crimes, forgotten how his greasy
black hair hung in curtains around his thin face, how
his black eyes had a dead, cold look. He was not
wearing nightclothes, but was dressed in his usual
black cloak, and he too was holding his wand ready
for a fight. “Where are the Carrows?” he asked quietly. “Wherever you told them to be, I expect, Severus,”
said Professor McGonagall. Snape stepped nearer, and his eyes flitted over
Professor McGonagall into the air around her, as if he
knew that Harry was there. Harry held his wand up
too, ready to attack. “I was under the impression,” said Snape, “that Alecto
had apprehended an intruder.” “Really?” said Professor McGonagall. “And what gave
you that impression?” Snape made a slight flexing movement of his left arm,
where the Dark Mark was branded into his skin.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Oh, but naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “You
Death Eaters have your own private means of
communication, I forgot.” Snape pretended not to have heard her. His eyes were
still probing the air all about her, and he was moving
gradually closer, with an air of hardly noticing what
he was doing. “I did not know that it was your night to patrol the
corridors, Minerva.” “You have some objection?” “I wonder what could have brought you out of your
bed at this late hour?” “I thought I heard a disturbance,” said Professor
McGonagall. “Really? But all seems calm.” Snape looked into her eyes. “Have you seen Harry Potter, Minerva? Because if you
have, I must insist — ” Professor McGonagall moved faster than Harry could
have believed: Her wand slashed through the air and
for a split second Harry thought that Snape must
crumple, unconscious, but the swiftness of his Shield
Charm was such that McGonagall was thrown off
balance. She brandished her wand at a torch on the
wall and it flew out of its bracket: Harry, about to
curse Snape, was forced to pull Luna out of the way
of the descending flames, which became a ring of fire
that filled the corridor and flew like a lasso at Snape  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Then it was no longer fire, but a great black serpent
that McGonagall blasted to smoke, which re-formed
and solidified in seconds to become a swarm of
pursuing daggers: Snape avoided them only by
forcing the suit of armor in front of him, and with
echoing clangs the daggers sank, one after another,
into its breast — “Minerva!” said a squeaky voice, and looking behind
him, still shielding Luna from flying spells, Harry saw
Professors Flitwick and Sprout sprinting up the
corridor toward them in their nightclothes, with the
enormous Professor Slughorn panting along at the
rear. “No!” squealed Flitwick, raising his wand. “You’ll do
no more murder at Hogwarts!” Flitwick’s spell hit the suit of armor behind which
Snape had taken shelter: With a clatter it came to life.
Snape struggled free of the crushing arms and sent it
flying back toward his attackers: Harry and Luna had
to dive sideways to avoid it as it smashed into the wall
and shattered. When Harry looked up again, Snape
was in full flight, McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout all
thundering after him: He hurtled through a classroom
door and, moments later, he heard McGonagall cry,
“Coward! COWARD !” “What’s happened, what’s happened?” asked Luna. Harry dragged her to her feet and they raced along
the corridor, trailing the Invisibility Cloak behind
them, into the deserted classroom where Professors
McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout were standing at a
smashed window. “He jumped,” said Professor McGonagall as Harry and
Luna ran into the room.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You mean he’s dead?” Harry sprinted to the window,
ignoring Flitwick’s and Sprout’s yells of shock at his
sudden appearance. “No, he’s not dead,” said McGonagall bitterly. “Unlike
Dumbledore, he was still carrying a wand ... and he
seems to have learned a few tricks from his master.” With a tingle of horror, Harry saw in the distance a
huge, batlike shape flying through the darkness
toward the perimeter wall. There were heavy footfalls behind them, and a great
deal of puffing: Slughorn had just caught up. “Harry!” he panted, massaging his immense chest
beneath his emerald-green silk pajamas. “My dear
boy ... what a surprise ... Minerva, do please explain.
... Severus ... what ... ?” “Our headmaster is taking a short break,” said
Professor McGonagall, pointing at the Snape-shaped
hole in the window. “Professor!” Harry shouted, his hands at his forehead.
He could see the Inferi-filled lake sliding beneath him,
and he felt the ghostly green boat bump into the
underground shore, and Voldemort leapt from it with
murder in his heart — “Professor, we’ve got to barricade the school, he’s
coming now!” “Very well. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is coming,”
she told the other teachers. Sprout and Flitwick
gasped; Slughorn let out a low groan. “Potter has
work to do in the castle on Dumbledore’s orders. We
need to put in place every protection of which we are
capable while Potter does what he needs to do.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You realize, of course, that nothing we do will be able
to keep out You-Know-Who indefinitely?” squeaked
Flitwick. “But we can hold him up,” said Professor Sprout. “Thank you, Pomona,” said Professor McGonagall,
and between the two witches there passed a look of
grim understanding. “I suggest we establish basic
protection around the place, then gather our students
and meet in the Great Hall. Most must be evacuated,
though if any of those who are over age wish to stay
and fight, I think they ought to be given the chance.” “Agreed,” said Professor Sprout, already hurrying
toward the door. “I shall meet you in the Great Hall in
twenty minutes with my House.” And as she jogged out of sight, they could hear her
muttering, “Tentacula. Devil’s Snare. And Snargaluff
pods ... yes, I’d like to see the Death Eaters fighting
those.” “I can act from here,” said Flitwick, and although he
could barely see out of it, he pointed his wand
through the smashed window and started muttering
incantations of great complexity. Harry heard a weird
rushing noise, as though Flitwick had unleashed the
power of the wind into the grounds. “Professor,” Harry said, approaching the little Charms
master, “Professor, I’m sorry to interrupt, but this is
important. Have you got any idea where the diadem of
Ravenclaw is?” “ — Protego Horribilis — the diadem of Ravenclaw?”
squeaked Flitwick. “A little extra wisdom never goes
amiss, Potter, but I hardly think it would be much
use in this situation!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I only meant — do you know where it is? Have you
ever seen it?” “Seen it? Nobody has seen it in living memory! Long
since lost, boy!” Harry felt a mixture of desperate disappointment and
panic. What, then, was the Horcrux? “We shall meet you and your Ravenclaws in the Great
Hall, Filius!” said Professor McGonagall, beckoning to
Harry and Luna to follow her. They had just reached the door when Slughorn
rumbled into speech. “My word,” he puffed, pale and sweaty, his walrus
mustache aquiver. “What a to-do! I’m not at all sure
whether this is wise, Minerva. He is bound to find a
way in, you know, and anyone who has tried to delay
him will be in most grievous peril — ” “I shall expect you and the Slytherins in the Great
Hall in twenty minutes, also,” said Professor
McGonagall. “If you wish to leave with your students,
we shall not stop you. But if any of you attempt to
sabotage our resistance or take up arms against us
within this castle, then, Horace, we duel to kill.” “Minerva!” he said, aghast. “The time has come for Slytherin House to decide
upon its loyalties,” interrupted Professor McGonagall.
“Go and wake your students, Horace.” Harry did not stay to watch Slughorn splutter: He and
Luna ran after Professor McGonagall, who had taken
up a position in the middle of the corridor and raised
her wand.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Piertotum — oh, for heaven’s sake, Filch, not now — ” The aged caretaker had just come hobbling into view,
shouting, “Students out of bed! Students in the
corridors!” “They’re supposed to be, you blithering idiot!” shouted
McGonagall. “Now go and do something constructive!
Find Peeves!” “P-Peeves?” stammered Filch as though he had never
heard the name before. “Yes, Peeves, you fool, Peevesl Haven’t you been
complaining about him for a quarter of a century? Go
and fetch him, at once!” Filch evidently thought Professor McGonagall had
taken leave of her senses, but hobbled away, hunch-
shouldered, muttering under his breath. “And now — Piertotum Locomotori” cried Professor
McGonagall. And all along the corridor the statues and suits of
armor jumped down from their plinths, and from the
echoing crashes from the floors above and below,
Harry knew that their fellows throughout the castle
had done the same. “Hogwarts is threatened!” shouted Professor
McGonagall. “Man the boundaries, protect us, do
your duty to our school!” Clattering and yelling, the horde of moving statues
stampeded past Harry: some of them smaller, others
larger, than life. There were animals too, and the
clanking suits of armor brandished swords and
spiked balls on chains.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Now, Potter,” said McGonagall, “you and Miss
Lovegood had better return to your friends and bring
them to the Great Hall — I shall rouse the other
Gryffindors.” They parted at the top of the next staircase, Harry
and Luna running back toward the concealed
entrance to the Room of Requirement. As they ran,
they met crowds of students, most wearing traveling
cloaks over their pajamas, being shepherded down to
the Great Hall by teachers and prefects. “That was Potter!” “ Harry Potted” “It was him, I swear, I just saw him!” But Harry did not look back, and at last they reached
the entrance to the Room of Requirement. Harry
leaned against the enchanted wall, which opened to
admit them, and he and Luna sped back down the
steep staircase. “Wh — ?” As the room came into view, Harry slipped down a few
stairs in shock. It was packed, far more crowded than
when he had last been in there. Kingsley and Lupin
were looking up at him, as were Oliver Wood, Katie
Bell, Angelina Johnson and Alicia Spinnet, Bill and
Fleur, and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley. “Harry, what’s happening?” said Lupin, meeting him
at the foot of the stairs. “Voldemort’s on his way, they’re barricading the
school — Snape’s run for it — What are you doing
here? How did you know?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We sent messages to the rest of Dumbledore’s Army,”
Fred explained. “You couldn’t expect everyone to miss
the fun, Harry, and the D.A. let the Order of the
Phoenix know, and it all kind of snowballed.” “What first, Harry?” called George. “What’s going on?” “They’re evacuating the younger kids and everyone’s
meeting in the Great Hall to get organized,” Harry
said. “We’re fighting.” There was a great roar and a surge toward the foot of
the stairs; he was pressed back against the wall as
they ran past him, the mingled members of the Order
of the Phoenix, Dumbledore’s Army, and Harry’s old
Quidditch team, all with their wands drawn, heading
up into the main castle. “Come on, Luna,” Dean called as he passed, holding
out his free hand; she took it and followed him back
up the stairs. The crowd was thinning: Only a little knot of people
remained below in the Room of Requirement, and
Harry joined them. Mrs. Weasley was struggling with
Ginny. Around them stood Lupin, Fred, George, Bill,
and Fleur. “You’re underage!” Mrs. Weasley shouted at her
daughter as Harry approached. “I won’t permit it! The
boys, yes, but you, you’ve got to go home!” “I won’t!” Ginny’s hair flew as she pulled her arm out of her
mother’s grip. “I’m in Dumbledore’s Army — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“A teenagers’ gang!” “A teenagers’ gang that’s about to take him on, which
no one else has dared to do!” said Fred. “She’s sixteen!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “She’s not old
enough! What you two were thinking, bringing her
with you — ” Fred and George looked slightly ashamed of
themselves. “Mum’s right, Ginny,” said Bill gently. “You can’t do
this. Everyone underage will have to leave, it’s only
right.” “I can’t go home!” Ginny shouted, angry tears
sparkling in her eyes. “My whole family’s here, I can’t
stand waiting there alone and not knowing and — ” Her eyes met Harry’s for the first time. She looked at
him beseechingly, but he shook his head and she
turned away bitterly. “Fine,” she said, staring at the entrance to the tunnel
back to the Hog’s Head. “I’ll say good-bye now, then,
and—” There was a scuffling and a great thump: Someone
else had clambered out of the tunnel, overbalanced
slightly, and fallen. He pulled himself up on the
nearest chair, looked around through lopsided horn-
rimmed glasses, and said, “Am I too late? Has it
started? I only just found out, so I — I — ” Percy spluttered into silence. Evidently he had not
expected to run into most of his family. There was a
long moment of astonishment, broken by Fleur
turning to Lupin and saying, in a wildly transparent  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
attempt to break the tension, “So — ’ow eez leetle
Teddy?” Lupin blinked at her, startled. The silence between
the Weasleys seemed to be solidifying, like ice. “I — oh yes — he’s fine!” Lupin said loudly. “Yes,
Tonks is with him — at her mother’s — ” Percy and the other Weasleys were still staring at one
another, frozen. “Here, I’ve got a picture!” Lupin shouted, pulling a
photograph from inside his jacket and showing it to
Fleur and Harry, who saw a tiny baby with a tuft of
bright turquoise hair, waving fat fists at the camera. “I was a fool!” Percy roared, so loudly that Lupin
nearly dropped his photograph. “I was an idiot, I was
a pompous prat, I was a — a — ” “Ministry-loving, family-disowning, power-hungry
moron,” said Fred. Percy swallowed. “Yes, I was!” “Well, you can’t say fairer than that,” said Fred,
holding out his hand to Percy. Mrs. Weasley burst into tears. She ran forward,
pushed Fred aside, and pulled Percy into a strangling
hug, while he patted her on the back, his eyes on his
father. “I’m sorry, Dad,” Percy said.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Mr. Weasley blinked rather rapidly, then he too
hurried to hug his son. “What made you see sense, Perce?” inquired George. “It’s been coming on for a while,” said Percy, mopping
his eyes under his glasses with a corner of his
traveling cloak. “But I had to find a way out and it’s
not so easy at the Ministry, they’re imprisoning
traitors all the time. I managed to make contact with
Aberforth and he tipped me off ten minutes ago that
Hogwarts was going to make a fight of it, so here I
am.” “Well, we do look to our prefects to take a lead at
times such as these,” said George in a good imitation
of Percy’s most pompous manner. “Now let’s get
upstairs and fight, or all the good Death Eaters’ll be
taken.” “So, you’re my sister-in-law now?” said Percy, shaking
hands with Fleur as they hurried off toward the
staircase with Bill, Fred, and George. “Ginny!” barked Mrs. Weasley. Ginny had been attempting, under cover of the
reconciliation, to sneak upstairs too. “Molly, how about this,” said Lupin. “Why doesn’t
Ginny stay here, then at least she’ll be on the scene
and know what’s going on, but she won’t be in the
middle of the fighting?” “That’s a good idea,” said Mr. Weasley firmly. “Ginny,
you stay in this room, you hear me?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Ginny did not seem to like the idea much, but under
her father’s unusually stern gaze, she nodded. Mr.
and Mrs. Weasley and Lupin headed off for the stairs
as well. “Where’s Ron?” asked Harry. “Where’s Hermione?” “They must have gone up to the Great Hall already,”
Mr. Weasley called over his shoulder. “I didn’t see them pass me,” said Harry. “They said something about a bathroom,” said Ginny,
“not long after you left.” “A bathroom?” Harry strode across the room to an open door leading
off the Room of Requirement and checked the
bathroom beyond. It was empty. “You’re sure they said bath — ?” But then his scar seared and the Room of
Requirement vanished: He was looking through the
high wrought-iron gates with winged boars on pillars
at either side, looking through the dark grounds
toward the castle, which was ablaze with lights.
Nagini lay draped over his shoulders. He was
possessed of that cold, cruel sense of purpose that
preceded murder.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE BATTLE OF HOGWARTS The enchanted ceiling of the Great Hall was dark and
scattered with stars, and below it the four long House
tables were lined with disheveled students, some in
traveling cloaks, others in dressing gowns. Here and
there shone the pearly white figures of the school
ghosts. Every eye, living and dead, was fixed upon
Professor McGonagall, who was speaking from the
raised platform at the top of the Hall. Behind her
stood the remaining teachers, including the palomino
centaur, Firenze, and the members of the Order of the
Phoenix who had arrived to fight. "... evacuation will be overseen by Mr. Filch and
Madam Pomfrey. Prefects, when I give the word, you
will organize your House and take your charges, in an
orderly fashion, to the evacuation point.” Many of the students looked petrified. However, as
Harry skirted the walls, scanning the Gryffindor table
for Ron and Hermione, Ernie Macmillan stood up at
the Hufflepuff table and shouted, “And what if we
want to stay and fight?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling There was a smattering of applause. “If you are of age, you may stay,” said Professor
McGonagall. “What about our things?” called a girl at the
Ravenclaw table. “Our trunks, our owls?” “We have no time to collect possessions,” said
Professor McGonagall. “The important thing is to get
you out of here safely.” “Where’s Professor Snape?” shouted a girl from the
Slytherin table. “He has, to use the common phrase, done a bunk,”
replied Professor McGonagall, and a great cheer
erupted from the Gryffindors, Hufflepuffs, and
Ravenclaws. Harry moved up the Hall alongside the Gryffindor
table, still looking for Ron and Hermione. As he
passed, faces turned in his direction, and a great deal
of whispering broke out in his wake. “We have already placed protection around the
castle,” Professor McGonagall was saying, “but it is
unlikely to hold for very long unless we reinforce it. I
must ask you, therefore, to move quickly and calmly,
and do as your prefects — ” But her final words were drowned as a different voice
echoed throughout the Hall. It was high, cold, and
clear: There was no telling from where it came; it
seemed to issue from the walls themselves. Like the
monster it had once commanded, it might have lain
dormant there for centuries.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I know that you are preparing to fight.” There were
screams amongst the students, some of whom
clutched each other, looking around in terror for the
source of the sound. “Your efforts are futile. You
cannot fight me. I do not want to kill you. I have great
respect for the teachers of Hogwarts. I do not want to
spill magical blood.” There was silence in the Hall now, the kind of silence
that presses against the eardrums, that seems too
huge to be contained by walls. “Give me Harry Potter,” said Voldemort’s voice, “and
none shall be harmed. Give me Harry Potter, and I
shall leave the school untouched. Give me Harry
Potter, and you will be rewarded. “You have until midnight.” The silence swallowed them all again. Every head
turned, every eye in the place seemed to have found
Harry, to hold him frozen in the glare of thousands of
invisible beams. Then a figure rose from the Slytherin
table and he recognized Pansy Parkinson as she
raised a shaking arm and screamed, “But he’s there!
Potter’s there\ Someone grab him!” Before Harry could speak, there was a massive
movement. The Gryffindors in front of him had risen
and stood facing, not Harry, but the Slytherins. Then
the Hufflepuffs stood, and almost at the same
moment, the Ravenclaws, all of them with their backs
to Harry, all of them looking toward Pansy instead,
and Harry, awestruck and overwhelmed, saw wands
emerging everywhere, pulled from beneath cloaks and
from under sleeves. “Thank you, Miss Parkinson,” said Professor
McGonagall in a clipped voice. “You will leave the Hall  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
first with Mr. Filch. If the rest of your House could
follow.” Harry heard the grinding of benches and then the
sound of the Slytherins trooping out on the other side
of the Hall. “Ravenclaws, follow on!” cried Professor McGonagall. Slowly the four tables emptied. The Slytherin table
was completely deserted, but a number of older
Ravenclaws remained seated while their fellows filed
out; even more Hufflepuffs stayed behind, and half of
Gryffindor remained in their seats, necessitating
Professor McGonagall’s descent from the teachers’
platform to chivvy the underage on their way. “Absolutely not, Creevey, go! And you, Peakes!” Harry hurried over to the Weasleys, all sitting
together at the Gryffindor table. “Where are Ron and Hermione?” “Haven’t you found — ?” began Mr. Weasley, looking
worried. But he broke off as Kingsley had stepped forward on
the raised platform to address those who had
remained behind. “We’ve only got half an hour until midnight, so we
need to act fast! A battle plan has been agreed
between the teachers of Hogwarts and the Order of
the Phoenix. Professors Flitwick, Sprout, and
McGonagall are going to take groups of fighters up to
the three highest towers — Ravenclaw, Astronomy,
and Gryffindor — where they’ll have a good overview,
excellent positions from which to work spells.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Meanwhile Remus” — he indicated Lupin — “Arthur”
— he pointed toward Mr. Weasley, sitting at the
Gryffindor table — “and I will take groups into the
grounds. We’ll need somebody to organize defense of
the entrances of the passageways into the school — ” “Sounds like a job for us,” called Fred, indicating
himself and George, and Kingsley nodded his
approval. “All right, leaders up here and we’ll divide up the
troops!” “Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, hurrying up to
him, as students flooded the platform, jostling for
position, receiving instructions, “ Aren’t you supposed
to be looking for something?” “What? Oh,” said Harry, “oh yeah!” He had almost forgotten about the Horcrux, almost
forgotten that the battle was being fought so that he
could search for it: The inexplicable absence of Ron
and Hermione had momentarily driven every other
thought from his mind. “Then go, Potter, go!” “Right — yeah — ” He sensed eyes following him as he ran out of the
Great Hall again, into the entrance hall still crowded
with evacuating students. He allowed himself to be
swept up the marble staircase with them, but at the
top he hurried off along a deserted corridor. Fear and
panic were clouding his thought processes. He tried
to calm himself, to concentrate on finding the
Horcrux, but his thoughts buzzed as frantically and
fruitlessly as wasps trapped beneath a glass. Without Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Ron and Hermione to help him he could not seem to
marshal his ideas. He slowed down, coming to a halt
halfway along an empty passage, where he sat down
upon the plinth of a departed statue and pulled the
Marauder’s Map out of the pouch around his neck. He could not see Ron’s or Hermione’s names
anywhere on it, though the density of the crowd of
dots now making its way to the Room of Requirement
might, he thought, be concealing them. He put the
map away, pressed his hands over his face, and
closed his eyes, trying to concentrate. ... Voldemort thought I’d go to Ravenclaw Tower. There it was: a solid fact, the place to start. Voldemort
had stationed Alecto Carrow in the Ravenclaw
common room, and there could only be one
explanation: Voldemort feared that Harry already
knew his Horcrux was connected to that House. But the only object anyone seemed to associate with
Ravenclaw was the lost diadem . . . and how could the
Horcrux be the diadem? How was it possible that
Voldemort, the Slytherin, had found the diadem that
had eluded generations of Ravenclaws? Who could
have told him where to look, when nobody had seen
the diadem in living memory? In living memory ... Beneath his fingers, Harry’s eyes flew open again. He
leapt up from the plinth and tore back the way he had
come, now in pursuit of his one last hope. The sound
of hundreds of people marching toward the Room of
Requirement grew louder and louder as he returned
to the marble stairs. Prefects were shouting
instructions, trying to keep track of the students in
their own Houses; there was much pushing and
shoving; Harry saw Zacharias Smith bowling over Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
first-years to get to the front of the queue; here and
there younger students were in tears, while older ones
called desperately for friends or siblings. ... Harry caught sight of a pearly white figure drifting
across the entrance hall below and yelled as loudly as
he could over the clamor. “Nick! NICK! I need to talk to you!” He forced his way back through the tide of students,
finally reaching the bottom of the stairs, where Nearly
Headless Nick, ghost of Gryffindor Tower, stood
waiting for him. “Harry! My dear boy!” Nick made to grasp Harry’s hands with both of his
own: Harry’s felt as though they had been thrust into
icy water. “Nick, you’ve got to help me. Who’s the ghost of
Ravenclaw Tower?” Nearly Headless Nick looked surprised and a little
offended. “The Gray Lady, of course; but if it is ghostly services
you require — ?” “It’s got to be her — d’you know where she is?” “Let’s see. ...” Nick’s head wobbled a little on his ruff as he turned
hither and thither, peering over the heads of the
swarming students.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“That’s her over there, Harry, the young woman with
the long hair.” Harry looked in the direction of Nick’s transparent,
pointing finger and saw a tall ghost who caught sight
of Harry looking at her, raised her eyebrows, and
drifted away through a solid wall. Harry ran after her. Once through the door of the
corridor into which she had disappeared, he saw her
at the very end of the passage, still gliding smoothly
away from him. “Hey — wait — come back!” She consented to pause, floating a few inches from
the ground. Harry supposed that she was beautiful,
with her waist-length hair and floor-length cloak, but
she also looked haughty and proud. Close to, he
recognized her as a ghost he had passed several times
in the corridor, but to whom he had never spoken. “You’re the Gray Lady?” She nodded but did not speak. “The ghost of Ravenclaw Tower?” “That is correct.” Her tone was not encouraging. “Please: I need some help. I need to know anything
you can tell me about the lost diadem.” A cold smile curved her lips. “I am afraid,” she said, turning to leave, “that I cannot
help you.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“WAIT!” He had not meant to shout, but anger and panic were
threatening to overwhelm him. He glanced at his
watch as she hovered in front of him: It was a quarter
to midnight. “This is urgent,” he said fiercely. “If that diadem’s at
Hogwarts, I’ve got to find it, fast.” “You are hardly the first student to covet the diadem,”
she said disdainfully. “Generations of students have
badgered me — ” “This isn’t about trying to get better marks!” Harry
shouted at her. “It’s about Voldemort — defeating
Voldemort — or aren’t you interested in that?” She could not blush, but her transparent cheeks
became more opaque, and her voice was heated as
she replied, “Of course I — how dare you suggest — ?” “Well, help me, then!” Her composure was slipping. “It — it is not a question of — ” she stammered. “My
mother’s diadem — ” “Your mother’s?” She looked angry with herself. “When I lived,” she said stiffly, “I was Helena
Ravenclaw.” “You’re her daughter? But then, you must know what
happened to it!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“While the diadem bestows wisdom,” she said with an
obvious effort to pull herself together, “I doubt that it
would greatly increase your chances of defeating the
wizard who calls himself Lord — ” “Haven’t I just told you, I’m not interested in wearing
it!” Harry said fiercely. “There’s no time to explain —
but if you care about Hogwarts, if you want to see
Voldemort finished, you’ve got to tell me anything you
know about the diadem!” She remained quite still, floating in midair, staring
down at him, and a sense of hopelessness engulfed
Harry. “If it wasn’t Dumbledore, explain how
Dobby knew we were in the cellar, Hermione?” “I can’t — but can you explain how Dumbledore sent
him to us if he’s lying in a tomb at Hogwarts?” “I dunno, it could’ve been his ghost!” “Dumbledore wouldn’t come back as a ghost,” said
Harry. There was little about Dumbledore he was sure
of now, but he knew that much. “He would have gone
on.” “What d’you mean, ‘gone on’?” asked Ron, but before
Harry could say any more, a voice behind them said, “
’Arry?” Fleur had come out of the cottage, her long silver hair
flying in the breeze.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ ’Arry, Grip’ook would like to speak to you. ’E eez in
ze smallest bedroom, ’e says ’e does not want to be
over’eard.” Her dislike of the goblin sending her to deliver
messages was clear; she looked irritable as she
walked back around the house. Griphook was waiting for them, as Fleur had said, in
the tiniest of the cottage’s three bedrooms, in which
Hermione and Luna slept by night. He had drawn the
red cotton curtains against the bright, cloudy sky,
which gave the room a fiery glow at odds with the rest
of the airy, light cottage. “I have reached my decision, Harry Potter,” said the
goblin, who was sitting cross-legged in a low chair,
drumming its arms with his spindly fingers. “Though
the goblins of Gringotts will consider it base
treachery, I have decided to help you — ” “That’s great!” said Harry, relief surging through him.
“Griphook, thank you, we’re really — ” “ — in return,” said the goblin firmly, “for payment.” Slightly taken aback, Harry hesitated. “How much do you want? I’ve got gold.” “Not gold,” said Griphook. “I have gold.” His black eyes glittered; there were no whites to his
eyes. “I want the sword. The sword of Godric Gryffindor.”
Harry’s spirits plummeted.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You can’t have that,” he said. “I’m sorry.” “Then,” said the goblin softly, “we have a problem.” “We can give you something else,” said Ron eagerly.
“I’ll bet the Lestranges have got loads of stuff, you can
take your pick once we get into the vault.” He had said the wrong thing. Griphook flushed
angrily. “I am not a thief, boy! I am not trying to procure
treasures to which I have no right!” “The sword’s ours — ” “It is not,” said the goblin. “We’re Gryffindors, and it was Godric Gryffindor’s — ” “And before it was Gryffindor’s, whose was it?”
demanded the goblin, sitting up straight. “No one’s,” said Ron. “It was made for him, wasn’t it?” “No!” cried the goblin, bristling with anger as he
pointed a long finger at Ron. “Wizarding arrogance
again! That sword was Ragnuk the First’s, taken from
him by Godric Gryffindor! It is a lost treasure, a
masterpiece of goblinwork! It belongs with the
goblins! The sword is the price of my hire, take it or
leave it!” Griphook glared at them. Harry glanced at the other
two, then said, “We need to discuss this, Griphook, if
that’s all right. Could you give us a few minutes?” The goblin nodded, looking sour.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Downstairs in the empty sitting room, Harry walked
to the fireplace, brow furrowed, trying to think what
to do. Behind him, Ron said, “He’s having a laugh. We
can’t let him have that sword.” “It is true?” Harry asked Hermione. “Was the sword
stolen by Gryffindor?” “I don’t know,” she said hopelessly. “Wizarding history
often skates over what the wizards have done to other
magical races, but there’s no account that I know of
that says Gryffindor stole the sword.” “It’ll be one of those goblin stories,” said Ron, “about
how the wizards are always trying to get one over on
them. I suppose we should think ourselves lucky he
hasn’t asked for one of our wands.” “Goblins have got good reason to dislike wizards, Ron,” said Hermione. “They’ve been treated brutally in
the past.” “Goblins aren’t exactly fluffy little bunnies, though,
are they?” said Ron. “They’ve killed plenty of us.
They’ve fought dirty too.” “But arguing with Griphook about whose race is most
underhanded and violent isn’t going to make him
more likely to help us, is it?” There was a pause while they tried to think of a way
around the problem. Harry looked out of the window
at Dobby’s grave. Luna was arranging sea lavender in
a jam jar beside the headstone. “Okay,” said Ron, and Harry turned back to face him,
“how’s this? We tell Griphook we need the sword until
we get inside the vault, and then he can have it.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
There’s a fake in there, isn’t there? We switch them,
and give him the fake.” “Ron, he’d know the difference better than we would!”
said Hermione. “He’s the only one who realized there
had been a swap!” “Yeah, but we could scarper before he realizes — ” He quailed beneath the look Hermione was giving
him. “That,” she said quietly, “is despicable. Ask for his
help, then double-cross him? And you wonder why
goblins don’t like wizards, Ron?” Ron’s ears had turned red. “All right, all right! It was the only thing I could think
of! What’s your solution, then?” “We need to offer him something else, something just
as valuable.” “Brilliant. I’ll go and get one of our other ancient
goblin-made swords and you can gift wrap it.” Silence fell between them again. Harry was sure that
the goblin would accept nothing but the sword, even
if they had something as valuable to offer him. Yet the
sword was their one, indispensable weapon against
the Horcruxes. He closed his eyes for a moment or two and listened
to the rush of the sea. The idea that Gryffindor might
have stolen the sword was unpleasant to him: He had
always been proud to be a Gryffindor; Gryffindor had
been the champion of Muggle-borns, the wizard who
had clashed with the pureblood-loving Slytherin. ... Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Maybe he’s lying,” Harry said, opening his eyes
again. “Griphook. Maybe Gryffindor didn’t take the
sword. How do we know the goblin version of history’s
right?” “Does it make a difference?” asked Hermione.
“Changes how I feel about it,” said Harry. He took a deep breath. “Well tell him he can have the sword after he’s helped
us get into that vault — but we’ll be careful to avoid
telling him exactly when he can have it.” A grin spread slowly across Ron’s face. Hermione,
however, looked alarmed. “Harry, we can’t — ” “He can have it,” Harry went on, “after we’ve used it
on all of the Horcruxes. I’ll make sure he gets it then.
I’ll keep my word.” “But that could be years!” said Hermione. “I know that, but he needn’t. I won’t be lying ...
really.” Harry met her eyes with a mixture of defiance and
shame. He remembered the words that had been
engraved over the gateway to Nurmengard: FOR THE
GREATER GOOD. He pushed the idea away. What
choice did they have? “I don’t like it,” said Hermione. “Nor do I, much,” Harry admitted.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Well, I think it’s genius,” said Ron, standing up
again. “Let’s go and tell him.” Back in the smallest bedroom, Harry made the offer,
careful to phrase it so as not to give any definite time
for the handover of the sword. Hermione frowned at
the floor while he was speaking; he felt irritated at
her, afraid that she might give the game away.
However, Griphook had eyes for nobody but Harry. “I have your word, Harry Potter, that you will give me
the sword of Gryffindor if I help you?” “Yes,” said Harry. “Then shake,” said the goblin, holding out his hand. Harry took it and shook. He wondered whether those
black eyes saw any misgivings in his own. Then
Griphook relinquished him, clapped his hands
together, and said, “So. We begin!” It was like planning to break into the Ministry all over
again. They settled to work in the smallest bedroom,
which was kept, according to Griphook’s preference,
in semidarkness. “I have visited the Lestranges’ vault only once,”
Griphook told them, “on the occasion I was told to
place inside it the false sword. It is one of the most
ancient chambers. The oldest Wizarding families store
their treasures at the deepest level, where the vaults
are largest and best protected. ...” They remained shut in the cupboardlike room for
hours at a time. Slowly the days stretched into weeks.
There was problem after problem to overcome, not
least of which was that their store of Polyjuice Potion
was greatly depleted.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“There’s really only enough left for one of us,” said
Hermione, tilting the thick mudlike potion against the
lamplight. “That’ll be enough,” said Harry, who was examining
Griphook’s hand-drawn map of the deepest
passageways. The other inhabitants of Shell Cottage could hardly
fail to notice that something was going on now that
Harry, Ron, and Hermione only emerged for
mealtimes. Nobody asked questions, although Harry
often felt Bill’s eyes on the three of them at the table,
thoughtful, concerned. The longer they spent together, the more Harry
realized that he did not much like the goblin.
Griphook was unexpectedly bloodthirsty, laughed at
the idea of pain in lesser creatures, and seemed to
relish the possibility that they might have to hurt
other wizards to reach the Lestranges’ vault. Harry
could tell that his distaste was shared by the other
two, but they did not discuss it: They needed
Griphook. The goblin ate only grudgingly with the rest of them.
Even after his legs had mended, he continued to
request trays of food in his room, like the still-frail
Ollivander, until Bill (following an angry outburst
from Fleur) went upstairs to tell him that the
arrangement could not continue. Thereafter Griphook
joined them at the overcrowded table, although he
refused to eat the same food, insisting, instead, on
lumps of raw meat, roots, and various fungi. Harry felt responsible: It was, after all, he who had
insisted that the goblin remain at Shell Cottage so
that he could question him; his fault that the whole  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Weasley family had been driven into hiding, that Bill,
Fred, George, and Mr. Weasley could no longer work. “I’m sorry,” he told Fleur, one blustery April evening
as he helped her prepare dinner. “I never meant you
to have to deal with all of this.” She had just set some knives to work, chopping up
steaks for Griphook and Bill, who had preferred his
meat bloody ever since he had been attacked by
Greyback. While the knives sliced away behind her,
her somewhat irritable expression softened. “ ’Arry, you saved my sister’s life, I do not forget.” This was not, strictly speaking, true, but Harry
decided against reminding her that Gabrielle had
never been in real danger. “Anyway,” Fleur went on, pointing her wand at a pot
of sauce on the stove, which began to bubble at once,
“Mr. Ollivander leaves for Muriel’s zis evening. Zat will
make zings easier. Ze goblin,” she scowled a little at
the mention of him, “can move downstairs, and you,
Ron, and Dean can take zat room.” “We don’t mind sleeping in the living room,” said
Harry, who knew that Griphook would think poorly of
having to sleep on the sofa; keeping Griphook happy
was essential to their plans. “Don’t worry about us.”
And when she tried to protest he went on, “We’ll be off
your hands soon too, Ron, Hermione, and I. We won’t
need to be here much longer.” “But what do you mean?” she said, frowning at him,
her wand pointing at the casserole dish now
suspended in midair. “Of course you must not leave,
you are safe ’ere!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
She looked rather like Mrs. Weasley as she said it,
and he was glad that the back door opened at that
moment. Luna and Dean entered, their hair damp
from the rain outside and their arms full of driftwood. "... and tiny little ears,” Luna was saying, “a bit like a
hippo’s, Daddy says, only purple and hairy. And if
you want to call them, you have to hum; they prefer a
waltz, nothing too fast. ...” Looking uncomfortable, Dean shrugged at Harry as
he passed, following Luna into the combined dining
and sitting room where Ron and Hermione were
laying the dinner table. Seizing the chance to escape
Fleur’s questions, Harry grabbed two jugs of pumpkin
juice and followed them. "... and if you ever come to our house I’ll be able to
show you the horn, Daddy wrote to me about it but I
haven’t seen it yet, because the Death Eaters took me
from the Hogwarts Express and I never got home for
Christmas,” Luna was saying, as she and Dean relaid
the fire. “Luna, we told you,” Hermione called over to her.
“That horn exploded. It came from an Erumpent, not
a Crumple-Horned Snorkack — ” “No, it was definitely a Snorkack horn,” said Luna
serenely. “Daddy told me. It will probably have re-
formed by now, they mend themselves, you know.” Hermione shook her head and continued laying down
forks as Bill appeared, leading Mr. Ollivander down
the stairs. The wandmaker still looked exceptionally
frail, and he clung to Bill’s arm as the latter
supported him, carrying a large suitcase.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
‘Tm going to miss you, Mr. Ollivander,” said Luna,
approaching the old man. “And I you, my dear,” said Ollivander, patting her on
the shoulder. “You were an inexpressible comfort to
me in that terrible place.” “So, au revoir, Mr. Ollivander,” said Fleur, kissing him
on both cheeks. “And I wonder whezzer you could
oblige me by delivering a package to Bill’s Auntie
Muriel? I never returned ’er tiara.” “It will be an honor,” said Ollivander with a little bow,
“the very least I can do in return for your generous
hospitality.” Fleur drew out a worn velvet case, which she opened
to show the wandmaker. The tiara sat glittering and
twinkling in the light from the low-hanging lamp. “Moonstones and diamonds,” said Griphook, who had
sidled into the room without Harry noticing. “Made by
goblins, I think?” “And paid for by wizards,” said Bill quietly, and the
goblin shot him a look that was both furtive and
challenging. A strong wind gusted against the cottage windows as
Bill and Ollivander set off into the night. The rest of
them squeezed in around the table; elbow to elbow
and with barely enough room to move, they started to
eat. The fire crackled and popped in the grate beside
them. Fleur, Harry noticed, was merely playing with
her food; she glanced at the window every few
minutes; however, Bill returned before they had
finished their first course, his long hair tangled by the
wind.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Everything’s fine,” he told Fleur. “Ollivander settled
in, Mum and Dad say hello. Ginny sends you all her
love. Fred and George are driving Muriel up the wall,
they’re still operating an Owl-Order business out of
her back room. It cheered her up to have her tiara
back, though. She said she thought we’d stolen it.” “Ah, she eez charmante, your aunt,” said Fleur
crossly, waving her wand and causing the dirty plates
to rise and form a stack in midair. She caught them
and marched out of the room. “Daddy’s made a tiara,” piped up Luna. “Well, more of
a crown, really.” Ron caught Harry’s eye and grinned; Harry knew that
he was remembering the ludicrous headdress they
had seen on their visit to Xenophilius. “Yes, he’s trying to re-create the lost diadem of
Ravenclaw. He thinks he’s identified most of the main
elements now. Adding the billywig wings really made
a difference — ” There was a bang on the front door. Everyone’s head
turned toward it. Fleur came running out of the
kitchen, looking frightened; Bill jumped to his feet,
his wand pointing at the door; Harry, Ron, and
Hermione did the same. Silently Griphook slipped
beneath the table, out of sight. “Who is it?” Bill called. “It is I, Remus John Lupin!” called a voice over the
howling wind. Harry experienced a thrill of fear; what
had happened? “I am a werewolf, married to
Nymphadora Tonks, and you, the Secret-Keeper of
Shell Cottage, told me the address and bade me come
in an emergency!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Lupin,” muttered Bill, and he ran to the door and
wrenched it open. Lupin fell over the threshold. He was white-faced,
wrapped in a traveling cloak, his graying hair
windswept. He straightened up, looked around the
room, making sure of who was there, then cried
aloud, “It’s a boy! We’ve named him Ted, after Dora’s
father!” Hermione shrieked. “Wha — ? Tonks — Tonks has had the baby?” “Yes, yes, she’s had the baby!” shouted Lupin. All
around the table came cries of delight, sighs of relief:
Hermione and Fleur both squealed, “Congratulations!” and Ron said, “Blimey, a baby!” as
if he had never heard of such a thing before. “Yes — yes — a boy,” said Lupin again, who seemed
dazed by his own happiness. He strode around the
table and hugged Harry; the scene in the basement of
Grimmauld Place might never have happened. “You’ll be godfather?” he said as he released Harry. “M-me?” stammered Harry “You, yes, of course — Dora quite agrees, no one
better — ” “I — yeah — blimey — ” Harry felt overwhelmed, astonished, delighted; now
Bill was hurrying to fetch wine, and Fleur was
persuading Lupin to join them for a drink.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“I can’t stay long, I must get back,” said Lupin,
beaming around at them all: He looked years younger
than Harry had ever seen him. “Thank you, thank
you, Bill.” Bill had soon filled all of their goblets, they stood and
raised them high in a toast. “To Teddy Remus Lupin,” said Lupin, “a great wizard
in the making!” “ ’Oo does ’e look like?” Fleur inquired. “I think he looks like Dora, but she thinks he is like
me. Not much hair. It looked black when he was
born, but I swear it’s turned ginger in the hour since.
Probably be blond by the time I get back. Andromeda
says Tonks’s hair started changing color the day that
she was born.” He drained his goblet. “Oh, go on
then, just one more,” he added, beaming, as Bill made
to fill it again. The wind buffeted the little cottage and the fire leapt
and crackled, and Bill was soon opening another
bottle of wine. Lupin’s news seemed to have taken
them out of themselves, removed them for a while
from their state of siege: Tidings of new life were
exhilarating. Only the goblin seemed untouched by
the suddenly festive atmosphere, and after a while he
slunk back to the bedroom he now occupied alone.
Harry thought he was the only one who had noticed
this, until he saw Bill’s eyes following the goblin up
the stairs. “No ... no ... I really must get back,” said Lupin at
last, declining yet another goblet of wine. He got to his
feet and pulled his traveling cloak back around
himself.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Good-bye, good-bye — I’ll try and bring some
pictures in a few days’ time — they’ll all be so glad to
know that I’ve seen you — ” He fastened his cloak and made his farewells,
hugging the women and grasping hands with the
men, then, still beaming, returned into the wild night. “Godfather, Harry!” said Bill as they walked into the
kitchen together, helping clear the table. “A real
honor! Congratulations!” As Harry set down the empty goblets he was carrying,
Bill pulled the door behind him closed, shutting out
the still-voluble voices of the others, who were
continuing to celebrate even in Lupin’s absence. “I wanted a private word, actually, Harry. It hasn’t
been easy to get an opportunity with the cottage this
full of people.” Bill hesitated. “Harry, you’re planning something with Griphook.” It was a statement, not a question, and Harry did not
bother to deny it. He merely looked at Bill, waiting. “I know goblins,” said Bill. “I’ve worked for Gringotts
ever since I left Hogwarts. As far as there can be
friendship between wizards and goblins, I have goblin
friends — or, at least, goblins I know well, and like.”
Again, Bill hesitated. “Harry, what do you want from Griphook, and what
have you promised him in return?” “I can’t tell you that,” said Harry. “Sorry, Bill.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The kitchen door opened behind them; Fleur was
trying to bring through more empty goblets. “Wait,” Bill told her. “Just a moment.” She backed out and he closed the door again. “Then I have to say this,” Bill went on. “If you have
struck any kind of bargain with Griphook, and most
particularly if that bargain involves treasure, you
must be exceptionally careful. Goblin notions of
ownership, payment, and repayment are not the same
as human ones.” Harry felt a slight squirm of discomfort, as though a
small snake had stirred inside him. “What do you mean?” he asked. “We are talking about a different breed of being,” said
Bill. “Dealings between wizards and goblins have been
fraught for centuries — but you’ll know all that from
History of Magic. There has been fault on both sides, I
would never claim that wizards have been innocent.
However, there is a belief among some goblins, and
those at Gringotts are perhaps most prone to it, that
wizards cannot be trusted in matters of gold and
treasure, that they have no respect for goblin
ownership.” “I respect — ” Harry began, but Bill shook his head. “You don’t understand, Harry, nobody could
understand unless they have lived with goblins. To a
goblin, the rightful and true master of any object is
the maker, not the purchaser. All goblin-made objects
are, in goblin eyes, rightfully theirs.” “But if it was bought — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“ — then they would consider it rented by the one who
had paid the money. They have, however, great
difficulty with the idea of goblin-made objects passing
from wizard to wizard. You saw Griphook’s face when
the tiara passed under his eyes. He disapproves. I
believe he thinks, as do the fiercest of his kind, that it
ought to have been returned to the goblins once the
original purchaser died. They consider our habit of
keeping goblin-made objects, passing them from
wizard to wizard without further payment, little more
than theft.” Harry had an ominous feeling now; he wondered
whether Bill guessed more than he was letting on. “All I am saying,” said Bill, setting his hand on the
door back into the sitting room, “is to be very careful
what you promise goblins, Harry. It would be less
dangerous to break into Gringotts than to renege on a
promise to a goblin.” “Right,” said Harry as Bill opened the door, “yeah.
Thanks. I’ll bear that in mind.” As he followed Bill back to the others a wry thought
came to him, born no doubt of the wine he had
drunk. He seemed set on course to become just as
reckless a godfather to Teddy Lupin as Sirius Black
had been to him.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
GRINGOTTS Their plans were made, their preparations complete;
in the smallest bedroom a single long, coarse black
hair (plucked from the sweater Hermione had been
wearing at Malfoy Manor) lay curled in a small glass
phial on the mantelpiece. “And you’ll be using her actual wand,” said Harry,
nodding toward the walnut wand, “so I reckon you’ll
be pretty convincing.” Hermione looked frightened that the wand might sting
or bite her as she picked it up. “I hate this thing,” she said in a low voice. “I really
hate it. It feels all wrong, it doesn’t work properly for
me. ... It’s like a bit of her.” Harry could not help but remember how Hermione
had dismissed his loathing of the blackthorn wand,
insisting that he was imagining things when it did not
work as well as his own, telling him to simply
practice. He chose not to repeat her own advice back  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling to her, however; the eve of their attempted assault on
Gringotts felt like the wrong moment to antagonize
her. “It’ll probably help you get in character, though,” said
Ron. “Think what that wand’s done!” “But that’s my point!” said Hermione. “This is the
wand that tortured Neville’s mum and dad, and who
knows how many other people? This is the wand that
killed Sirius!” Harry had not thought of that: He looked down at the
wand and was visited by a brutal urge to snap it, to
slice it in half with Gryffindor’s sword, which was
propped against the wall beside him. “I miss my wand,” Hermione said miserably. “I wish
Mr. Ollivander could have made me another one too.” Mr. Ollivander had sent Luna a new wand that
morning. She was out on the back lawn at that
moment, testing its capabilities in the late afternoon
sun. Dean, who had lost his wand to the Snatchers,
was watching rather gloomily. Harry looked down at the hawthorn wand that had
once belonged to Draco Malfoy. He had been
surprised, but pleased, to discover that it worked for
him at least as well as Hermione ’s had done.
Remembering what Ollivander had told them of the
secret workings of wands, Harry thought he knew
what Hermione ’s problem was: She had not won the
walnut wand’s allegiance by taking it personally from
Bellatrix. The door of the bedroom opened and Griphook
entered. Harry reached instinctively for the hilt of the
sword and drew it close to him, but regretted his  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
action at once: He could tell that the goblin had
noticed. Seeking to gloss over the sticky moment, he
said, “We’ve just been checking the last-minute stuff,
Griphook. We’ve told Bill and Fleur we’re leaving
tomorrow, and we’ve told them not to get up to see us
off.” They had been firm on this point, because Hermione
would need to transform into Bellatrix before they left,
and the less that Bill and Fleur knew or suspected
about what they were about to do, the better. They
had also explained that they would not be returning.
As they had lost Perkins’s old tent on the night that
the Snatchers caught them, Bill had lent them
another one. It was now packed inside the beaded
bag, which, Harry was impressed to learn, Hermione
had protected from the Snatchers by the simple
expedient of stuffing it down her sock. Though he would miss Bill, Fleur, Luna, and Dean,
not to mention the home comforts they had enjoyed
over the last few weeks, Harry was looking forward to
escaping the confinement of Shell Cottage. He was
tired of trying to make sure that they were not
overheard, tired of being shut in the tiny, dark
bedroom. Most of all, he longed to be rid of Griphook.
However, precisely how and when they were to part
from the goblin without handing over Gryffindor’s
sword remained a question to which Harry had no
answer. It had been impossible to decide how they
were going to do it, because the goblin rarely left
Harry, Ron, and Hermione alone together for more
than five minutes at a time: “He could give my mother
lessons,” growled Ron, as the goblin’s long fingers
kept appearing around the edges of doors. With Bill’s
warning in mind, Harry could not help suspecting
that Griphook was on the watch for possible
skulduggery. Hermione disapproved so heartily of the
planned double-cross that Harry had given up Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
attempting to pick her brains on how best to do it;
Ron, on the rare occasions that they had been able to
snatch a few Griphook-free moments, had come up
with nothing better than “Well just have to wing it,
mate.” Harry slept badly that night. Lying awake in the early
hours, he thought back to the way he had felt the
night before they had infiltrated the Ministry of Magic
and remembered a determination, almost an
excitement. Now he was experiencing jolts of anxiety,
nagging doubts: He could not shake off the fear that it
was all going to go wrong. He kept telling himself that
their plan was good, that Griphook knew what they
were facing, that they were well-prepared for all the
difficulties they were likely to encounter, yet still he
felt uneasy. Once or twice he heard Ron stir and was
sure that he too was awake, but they were sharing
the sitting room with Dean, so Harry did not speak. It was a relief when six o’clock arrived and they could
slip out of their sleeping bags, dress in the
semidarkness, then creep out into the garden, where
they were to meet Hermione and Griphook. The dawn
was chilly, but there was little wind now that it was
May. Harry looked up at the stars still glimmering
palely in the dark sky and listened to the sea washing
backward and forward against the cliff: He was going
to miss the sound. Small green shoots were forcing their way up through
the red earth of Dobby’s grave now; in a year’s time
the mound would be covered in flowers. The white
stone that bore the elf’s name had already acquired a
weathered look. He realized now that they could
hardly have laid Dobby to rest in a more beautiful
place, but Harry ached with sadness to think of
leaving him behind. Looking down on the grave, he
wondered yet again how the elf had known where to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
come to rescue them. His fingers moved
absentmindedly to the little pouch still strung around
his neck, through which he could feel the jagged
mirror fragment in which he had been sure he had
seen Dumbledore’s eye. Then the sound of a door
opening made him look around. Bellatrix Lestrange was striding across the lawn
toward them, accompanied by Griphook. As she
walked, she was tucking the small, beaded bag into
the inside pocket of another set of the old robes they
had taken from Grimmauld Place. Though Harry
knew perfectly well that it was really Hermione, he
could not suppress a shiver of loathing. She was taller
than he was, her long black hair rippling down her
back, her heavily lidded eyes disdainful as they rested
upon him; but then she spoke, and he heard
Hermione through Bellatrix’s low voice. “She tasted disgusting, worse than Gurdyroots! Okay,
Ron, come here so I can do you. ...” “Right, but remember, I don’t like the beard too long “Oh, for heaven’s sake, this isn’t about looking
handsome — ” “It’s not that, it gets in the way! But I
liked my nose a bit shorter, try and do it the way you
did last time.” Hermione sighed and set to work, muttering under
her breath as she transformed various aspects of
Ron’s appearance. He was to be given a completely
fake identity, and they were trusting to the malevolent
aura cast by Bellatrix to protect him. Meanwhile
Harry and Griphook were to be concealed under the
Invisibility Cloak. “There,” said Hermione, “how does he look, Harry?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
It was just possible to discern Ron under his disguise,
but only, Harry thought, because he knew him so
well. Ron’s hair was now long and wavy; he had a
thick brown beard and mustache, no freckles, a
short, broad nose, and heavy eyebrows. “Well, he’s not my type, but he’ll do,” said Harry. “Shall we go, then?” All three of them glanced back at Shell Cottage, lying
dark and silent under the fading stars, then turned
and began to walk toward the point, just beyond the
boundary wall, where the Fidelius Charm stopped
working and they would be able to Disapparate. Once
past the gate, Griphook spoke. “I should climb up now, Harry Potter, I think?” Harry bent down and the goblin clambered onto his
back, his hands linked in front of Harry’s throat. He
was not heavy, but Harry disliked the feeling of the
goblin and the surprising strength with which he
clung on. Hermione pulled the Invisibility Cloak out of
the beaded bag and threw it over them both. “Perfect,” she said, bending down to check Harry’s
feet. “I can’t see a thing. Let’s go.” Harry turned on the spot, with Griphook on his
shoulders, concentrating with all his might on the
Leaky Cauldron, the inn that was the entrance to
Diagon Alley. The goblin clung even tighter as they
moved into the compressing darkness, and seconds
later Harry’s feet found pavement and he opened his
eyes on Charing Cross Road. Muggles bustled past
wearing the hangdog expressions of early morning,
quite unconscious of the little inn’s existence.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The bar of the Leaky Cauldron was nearly deserted.
Tom, the stooped and toothless landlord, was
polishing glasses behind the bar counter; a couple of
warlocks having a muttered conversation in the far
corner glanced at Hermione and drew back into the
shadows. “Madam Lestrange,” murmured Tom, and as
Hermione passed he inclined his head subserviently. “Good morning,” said Hermione, and as Harry crept
past, still carrying Griphook piggyback under the
Cloak, he saw Tom look surprised. “Too polite,” Harry whispered in Hermione’s ear as
they passed out of the inn into the tiny backyard.
“You need to treat people like they’re scum!” “Okay, okay!” Hermione drew out Bellatrix’s wand and tapped a
brick in the nondescript wall in front of them. At once
the bricks began to whirl and spin: A hole appeared
in the middle of them, which grew wider and wider,
finally forming an archway onto the narrow cobbled
street that was Diagon Alley. It was quiet, barely time for the shops to open, and
there were hardly any shoppers abroad. The crooked,
cobbled street was much altered now from the
bustling place Harry had visited before his first term
at Hogwarts so many years before. More shops than
ever were boarded up, though several new
establishments dedicated to the Dark Arts had been
created since his last visit. Harry’s own face glared
down at him from posters plastered over many
windows, always captioned with the words
UNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
A number of ragged people sat huddled in doorways.
He heard them moaning to the few passersby,
pleading for gold, insisting that they were really
wizards. One man had a bloody bandage over his eye. As they set off along the street, the beggars glimpsed
Hermione. They seemed to melt away before her,
drawing hoods over their faces and fleeing as fast as
they could. Hermione looked after them curiously,
until the man with the bloodied bandage came
staggering right across her path. “My children!” he bellowed, pointing at her. His voice
was cracked, high-pitched; he sounded distraught.
“Where are my children? What has he done with
them? You know, you know\” “I — I really — ” stammered Hermione. The man lunged at her, reaching for her throat: Then,
with a bang and a burst of red light he was thrown
backward onto the ground, unconscious. Ron stood
there, his wand still outstretched and a look of shock
visible behind his beard. Faces appeared at the
windows on either side of the street, while a little knot
of prosperous-looking passersby gathered their robes
about them and broke into gentle trots, keen to
vacate the scene. Their entrance into Diagon Alley could hardly have
been more conspicuous; for a moment Harry
wondered whether it might not be better to leave now
and try to think of a different plan. Before they could
move or consult one another, however, they heard a
cry from behind them. “Why, Madam Lestrange!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry whirled around and Griphook tightened his
hold around Harry’s neck: A tall, thin wizard with a
crown of bushy gray hair and a long, sharp nose was
striding toward them. “It’s Travers,” hissed the goblin into Harry’s ear, but
at that moment Harry could not think who Travers
was. Hermione had drawn herself up to her fullest
height and said with as much contempt as she could
muster: “And what do you want?” Travers stopped in his tracks, clearly affronted. “ He’s another Death Eater\” breathed Griphook, and
Harry sidled sideways to repeat the information into
Hermione ’s ear. “I merely sought to greet you,” said Travers coolly,
“but if my presence is not welcome ...” Harry recognized his voice now; Travers was one of
the Death Eaters who had been summoned to
Xenophilius’s house. “No, no, not at all, Travers,” said Hermione quickly,
trying to cover up her mistake. “How are you?” “Well, I confess I am surprised to see you out and
about, Bellatrix.” “Really? Why?” asked Hermione. “Well,” Travers coughed, “I heard that the inhabitants
of Malfoy Manor were confined to the house, after the
... ah ... escape.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry willed Hermione to keep her head. If this was
true, and Bellatrix was not supposed to be out in
public — “The Dark Lord forgives those who have served him
most faithfully in the past,” said Hermione in a
magnificent imitation of Bellatrix’s most
contemptuous manner. “Perhaps your credit is not as
good with him as mine is, Travers.” Though the Death Eater looked offended, he also
seemed less suspicious. He glanced down at the man
Ron had just Stunned. “How did it offend you?” “It does not matter, it will not do so again,” said
Hermione coolly. “Some of these wandless can be troublesome,” said
Travers. “While they do nothing but beg I have no
objection, but one of them actually asked me to plead
her case at the Ministry last week. ‘I’m a witch, sir, I’m
a witch, let me prove it to youV ” he said in a squeaky
impersonation. “As if I was going to give her my wand
— but whose wand,” said Travers curiously, “are you
using at the moment, Bellatrix? I heard that your own
was — ” “I have my wand here,” said Hermione coldly, holding
up Bellatrix’s wand. “I don’t know what rumors you
have been listening to, Travers, but you seem sadly
misinformed.” Travers seemed a little taken aback at that, and he
turned instead to Ron. “Who is your friend? I do not recognize him.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“This is Dragomir Despard,” said Hermione; they had
decided that a fictional foreigner was the safest cover
for Ron to assume. “He speaks very little English, but
he is in sympathy with the Dark Lord’s aims. He has
traveled here from Transylvania to see our new
regime.” “Indeed? How do you do, Dragomir?” “ ’Ow you?” said Ron, holding out his hand. Travers extended two fingers and shook Ron’s hand
as though frightened of dirtying himself. “So what brings you and your — ah — sympathetic
friend to Diagon Alley this early?” asked Travers. “I need to visit Gringotts,” said Hermione. “Alas, I also,” said Travers. “Gold, filthy gold! We
cannot live without it, yet I confess I deplore the
necessity of consorting with our long-fingered
friends.” Harry felt Griphook’s clasped hands tighten
momentarily around his neck. “Shall we?” said Travers, gesturing Hermione forward. Hermione had no choice but to fall into step beside
him and head along the crooked, cobbled street
toward the place where the snowy-white Gringotts
stood towering over the other little shops. Ron sloped
along beside them, and Harry and Griphook followed. A watchful Death Eater was the very last thing they
needed, and the worst of it was, with Travers
marching at what he believed to be Bellatrix’s side,
there was no means for Harry to communicate with  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Hermione or Ron. All too soon they arrived at the foot
of the marble steps leading up to the great bronze
doors. As Griphook had already warned them, the
liveried goblins who usually flanked the entrance had
been replaced by two wizards, both of whom were
clutching long thin golden rods. “Ah, Probity Probes,” sighed Travers theatrically, “so
crude — but effective!” And he set off up the steps, nodding left and right to
the wizards, who raised the golden rods and passed
them up and down his body. The Probes, Harry knew,
detected spells of concealment and hidden magical
objects. Knowing that he had only seconds; Harry
pointed Draco’s wand at each of the guards in turn
and murmured, “Confundo” twice. Unnoticed by
Travers, who was looking through the bronze doors at
the inner hall, each of the guards gave a little start as
the spells hit them. Hermione ’s long black hair rippled behind her as she
climbed the steps. “One moment, madam,” said the guard, raising his
Probe. “But you’ve just done that!” said Hermione in
Bellatrix’s commanding, arrogant voice. Travers
looked around, eyebrows raised. The guard was
confused. He stared down at the thin golden Probe
and then at his companion, who said in a slightly
dazed voice, “Yeah, you’ve just checked them, Marius.” Hermione swept forward, Ron by her side, Harry and
Griphook trotting invisibly behind them. Harry  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
glanced back as they crossed the threshold: The
wizards were both scratching their heads. Two goblins stood before the inner doors, which were
made of silver and which carried the poem warning of
dire retribution to potential thieves. Harry looked up
at it, and all of a sudden a knife-sharp memory came
to him: standing on this very spot on the day that he
had turned eleven, the most wonderful birthday of his
life, and Hagrid standing beside him saying, “ Like I
said, yeh’d be mad ter try an’ rob it.” Gringotts had
seemed a place of wonder that day, the enchanted
repository of a trove of gold he had never known he
possessed, and never for an instant could he have
dreamed that he would return to steal. ... But within
seconds they were standing in the vast marble hall of
the bank. The long counter was manned by goblins sitting on
high stools, serving the first customers of the day.
Hermione, Ron, and Travers headed toward an old
goblin who was examining a thick gold coin through
an eyeglass. Hermione allowed Travers to step ahead
of her on the pretext of explaining features of the hall
to Ron. The goblin tossed the coin he was holding aside, said
to nobody in particular, “Leprechaun,” and then
greeted Travers, who passed over a tiny golden key,
which was examined and given back to him. Hermione stepped forward. “Madam Lestrange!” said the goblin, evidently
startled. “Dear me! How — how may I help you
today?” “I wish to enter my vault,” said Hermione.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The old goblin seemed to recoil a little. Harry glanced
around. Not only was Travers hanging back,
watching, but several other goblins had looked up
from their work to stare at Hermione. “You have ... identification?” asked the goblin. “Identification? I — I have never been asked for
identification before!” said Hermione. “ They know\” whispered Griphook in Harry’s ear.
“They must have been warned there might be an
impostor !” “Your wand will do, madam,” said the goblin. He held
out a slightly trembling hand, and in a dreadful blast
of realization Harry knew that the goblins of Gringotts
were aware that Bellatrix’s wand had been stolen. “Act now, act now,” whispered Griphook in Harry’s
ear, “the Imperius Cursel” Harry raised the hawthorn wand beneath the cloak,
pointed it at the old goblin, and whispered, for the
first time in his life, “Imperiol” A curious sensation shot down Harry’s arm, a feeling
of tingling warmth that seemed to flow from his mind,
down the sinews and veins connecting him to the
wand and the curse it had just cast. The goblin took
Bellatrix’s wand, examined it closely, and then said,
“Ah, you have had a new wand made, Madam
Lestrange!” “What?” said Hermione. “No, no, that’s mine — ” “A new wand?” said Travers, approaching the counter
again; still the goblins all around were watching. “But  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
how could you have done, which wandmaker did you
use?” Harry acted without thinking: Pointing his wand at
Travers, he muttered, “Imperiol” once more. “Oh yes, I see,” said Travers, looking down at
Bellatrix’s wand, “yes, very handsome. And is it
working well? I always think wands require a little
breaking in, don’t you?” Hermione looked utterly bewildered, but to Harry’s
enormous relief she accepted the bizarre turn of
events without comment. The old goblin behind the counter clapped his hands
and a younger goblin approached. “I shall need the Clankers,” he told the goblin, who
dashed away and returned a moment later with a
leather bag that seemed to be full of jangling metal,
which he handed to his senior. “Good, good! So, if you
will follow me, Madam Lestrange,” said the old goblin,
hopping down off his stool and vanishing from sight, “I shall take you to your vault.” He appeared around the end of the counter, jogging
happily toward them, the contents of the leather bag
still jingling. Travers was now standing quite still with
his mouth hanging wide open. Ron was drawing
attention to this odd phenomenon by regarding
Travers with confusion. “Wait — Bogrod!” Another goblin came scurrying around the counter.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We have instructions,” he said with a bow to
Hermione. “Forgive me, Madam, but there have been
special orders regarding the vault of Lestrange.” He whispered urgently in Bogrod’s ear, but the
Imperiused goblin shook him off. “I am aware of the instructions. Madam Lestrange
wishes to visit her vault. ... Very old family ... old
clients ... This way, please ...” And, still clanking, he hurried toward one of the many
doors leading off the hall. Harry looked back at
Travers, who was still rooted to the spot looking
abnormally vacant, and made his decision: With a
flick of his wand he made Travers come with them,
walking meekly in their wake as they reached the
door and passed into the rough stone passageway
beyond, which was lit with flaming torches. “We’re in trouble; they suspect,” said Harry as the
door slammed behind them and he pulled off the
Invisibility Cloak. Griphook jumped down from his
shoulders; neither Travers nor Bogrod showed the
slightest surprise at the sudden appearance of Harry
Potter in their midst. “They’re Imperiused,” he added,
in response to Hermione and Ron’s confused queries
about Travers and Bogrod, who were both now
standing there looking blank. “I don’t think I did it
strongly enough, I don’t know. ...” And another memory darted through his mind, of the
real Bellatrix Lestrange shrieking at him when he had
first tried to use an Unforgivable Curse: “You need to
mean them, Potter!” “What do we do?” asked Ron. “Shall we get out now,
while we can?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“If we can,” said Hermione, looking back toward the
door into the main hall, beyond which who knew
what was happening. “We’ve got this far, I say we go on,” said Harry. “Good!” said Griphook. “So, we need Bogrod to control
the cart; I no longer have the authority. But there will
not be room for the wizard.” Harry pointed his wand at Travers. “Imperio\” The wizard turned and set off along the dark track at
a smart pace. “What are you making him do?” “Hide,” said Harry as he pointed his wand at Bogrod,
who whistled to summon a little cart that came
trundling along the tracks toward them out of the
darkness. Harry was sure he could hear shouting
behind them in the main hall as they all clambered
into it, Bogrod in front with Griphook, Harry, Ron,
and Hermione crammed together in the back. With a jerk the cart moved off, gathering speed: They
hurtled past Travers, who was wriggling into a crack
in the wall, then the cart began twisting and turning
through the labyrinthine passages, sloping downward
all the time. Harry could not hear anything over the
rattling of the cart on the tracks: His hair flew behind
him as they swerved between stalactites, flying ever
deeper into the earth, but he kept glancing back. They might as well have left enormous footprints
behind them; the more he thought about it, the more
foolish it seemed to have disguised Hermione as  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Bellatrix, to have brought along Bellatrix’s wand,
when the Death Eaters knew who had stolen it — They were deeper than Harry had ever penetrated
within Gringotts; they took a hairpin bend at speed
and saw ahead of them, with seconds to spare, a
waterfall pounding over the track. Harry heard
Griphook shout, “No!” but there was no braking: They
zoomed through it. Water filled Harry’s eyes and
mouth: He could not see or breathe: Then, with an
awful lurch, the cart flipped over and they were all
thrown out of it. Harry heard the cart smash into
pieces against the passage wall, heard Hermione
shriek something, and felt himself glide back toward
the ground as though weightless, landing painlessly
on the rocky passage floor. “C-Cushioning Charm,” Hermione spluttered, as Ron
pulled her to her feet, but to Harry’s horror he saw
that she was no longer Bellatrix; instead she stood
there in overlarge robes, sopping wet and completely
herself; Ron was red-haired and beardless again. They were realizing it as they looked at each other,
feeling their own faces. “The Thief’s Downfall!” said Griphook, clambering to
his feet and looking back at the deluge onto the
tracks, which, Harry knew now, had been more than
water. “It washes away all enchantment, all magical
concealment! They know there are impostors in
Gringotts, they have set off defenses against us!” Harry saw Hermione checking that she still had the
beaded bag, and hurriedly thrust his own hand under
his jacket to make sure he had not lost the Invisibility
Cloak. Then he turned to see Bogrod shaking his
head in bewilderment: The Thief’s Downfall seemed to
have lifted the Imperius Curse.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We need him,” said Griphook, “we cannot enter the
vault without a Gringotts goblin. And we need the
Clankers!” “Imperiol” Harry said again; his voice echoed through
the stone passage as he felt again the sense of heady
control that flowed from brain to wand. Bogrod
submitted once more to his will, his befuddled
expression changing to one of polite indifference, as
Ron hurried to pick up the leather bag of metal tools. “Harry, I think I can hear people coming!” said
Hermione, and she pointed Bellatrix’s wand at the
waterfall and cried, “Protego\” They saw the Shield
Charm break the flow of enchanted water as it flew up
the passageway. “Good thinking,” said Harry. “Lead the way, Griphook!” “How are we going to get out again?” Ron asked as
they hurried on foot into the darkness after the
goblin, Bogrod panting in their wake like an old dog. “Let’s worry about that when we have to,” said Harry.
He was trying to listen: He thought he could hear
something clanking and moving around nearby.
“Griphook, how much farther?” “Not far, Harry Potter, not far ...” And they turned a corner and saw the thing for which
Harry had been prepared, but which still brought all
of them to a halt. A gigantic dragon was tethered to the ground in front
of them, barring access to four or five of the deepest
vaults in the place. The beast’s scales had turned pale
and flaky during its long incarceration under the  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
ground; its eyes were milkily pink; both rear legs bore
heavy cuffs from which chains led to enormous pegs
driven deep into the rocky floor. Its great spiked
wings, folded close to its body, would have filled the
chamber if it spread them, and when it turned its
ugly head toward them, it roared with a noise that
made the rock tremble, opened its mouth, and spat a
jet of fire that sent them running back up the
passageway. “It is partially blind,” panted Griphook, “but even
more savage for that. However, we have the means to
control it. It has learned what to expect when the
Clankers come. Give them to me.” Ron passed the bag to Griphook, and the goblin
pulled out a number of small metal instruments that
when shaken made a loud, ringing noise like
miniature hammers on anvils. Griphook handed them
out: Bogrod accepted his meekly. “You know what to do,” Griphook told Harry, Ron,
and Hermione. “It will expect pain when it hears the
noise: It will retreat, and Bogrod must place his palm
upon the door of the vault.” They advanced around the corner again, shaking the
Clankers, and the noise echoed off the rocky walls,
grossly magnified, so that the inside of Harry’s skull
seemed to vibrate with the din. The dragon let out
another hoarse roar, then retreated. Harry could see
it trembling, and as they drew nearer he saw the
scars made by vicious slashes across its face, and
guessed that it had been taught to fear hot swords
when it heard the sound of the Clankers. “Make him press his hand to the door!” Griphook
urged Harry, who turned his wand again upon
Bogrod. The old goblin obeyed, pressing his palm to  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
the wood, and the door of the vault melted away to
reveal a cavelike opening crammed from floor to
ceiling with golden coins and goblets, silver armor,
the skins of strange creatures — some with long
spines, others with drooping wings — potions in
jeweled flasks, and a skull still wearing a crown. “Search, fast!” said Harry as they all hurried inside
the vault. He had described Hufflepuff’s cup to Ron and
Hermione, but if it was the other, unknown Horcrux
that resided in this vault, he did not know what it
looked like. He barely had time to glance around,
however, before there was a muffled clunk from
behind them: The door had reappeared, sealing them
inside the vault, and they were plunged into total
darkness. “No matter, Bogrod will be able to release us!” said
Griphook as Ron gave a shout of surprise. “Light your
wands, can’t you? And hurry, we have very little
time!” “Lumosl” Harry shone his lit wand around the vault: Its beam
fell upon glittering jewels; he saw the fake sword of
Gryffindor lying on a high shelf amongst a jumble of
chains. Ron and Hermione had lit their wands too,
and were now examining the piles of objects
surrounding them. “Harry, could this be — ? Aargh!” Hermione screamed in pain, and Harry turned his
wand on her in time to see a jeweled goblet tumbling
from her grip. But as it fell, it split, became a shower
of goblets, so that a second later, with a great clatter,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
the floor was covered in identical cups rolling in every
direction, the original impossible to discern amongst
them. “It burned me!” moaned Hermione, sucking her
blistered fingers. “They have added Gemino and Flagrante Curses!”
said Griphook. “Everything you touch will burn and
multiply, but the copies are worthless — and if you
continue to handle the treasure, you will eventually
be crushed to death by the weight of expanding gold!” “Okay, don’t touch anything!” said Harry desperately,
but even as he said it, Ron accidentally nudged one of
the fallen goblets with his foot, and twenty more
exploded into being while Ron hopped on the spot,
part of his shoe burned away by contact with the hot
metal. “Stand still, don’t move!” said Hermione, clutching at
Ron. “Just look around!” said Harry. “Remember, the cup’s
small and gold, it’s got a badger engraved on it, two
handles — otherwise see if you can spot Ravenclaw’s
symbol anywhere, the eagle — ” They directed their wands into every nook and
crevice, turning cautiously on the spot. It was
impossible not to brush up against anything; Harry
sent a great cascade of fake Galleons onto the ground
where they joined the goblets, and now there was
scarcely room to place their feet, and the glowing gold
blazed with heat, so that the vault felt like a furnace.
Harry’s wandlight passed over shields and goblin-
made helmets set on shelves rising to the ceiling;
higher and higher he raised the beam, until suddenly  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
it found an object that made his heart skip and his
hand tremble. “It’s there, it’s up there\” Ron and Hermione pointed their wands at it too, so
that the little golden cup sparkled in a three-way
spotlight: the cup that had belonged to Helga
Hufflepuff, which had passed into the possession of
Hepzibah Smith, from whom it had been stolen by
Tom Riddle. “And how the hell are we going to get up there
without touching anything?” asked Ron. “Accio Cup\” cried Hermione, who had evidently
forgotten in her desperation what Griphook had told
them during their planning sessions. “No use, no use!” snarled the goblin. “Then what do we do?” said Harry, glaring at the
goblin. “If you want the sword, Griphook, then you’ll
have to help us more than — wait! Can I touch stuff
with the sword? Hermione, give it here!” Hermione fumbled inside her robes, drew out the
beaded bag, rummaged for a few seconds, then
removed the shining sword. Harry seized it by its
rubied hilt and touched the tip of the blade to a silver
flagon nearby, which did not multiply. “If I can just poke the sword through a handle — but
how am I going to get up there?” The shelf on which the cup reposed was out of reach
for any of them, even Ron, who was tallest. The heat
from the enchanted treasure rose in waves, and sweat
ran down Harry’s face and back as he struggled to  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
think of a way up to the cup; and then he heard the
dragon roar on the other side of the vault door, and
the sound of clanking growing louder and louder. They were truly trapped now: There was no way out
except through the door, and a horde of goblins
seemed to be approaching on the other side. Harry
looked at Ron and Hermione and saw terror in their
faces. “Hermione,” said Harry as the clanking grew louder,
“I’ve got to get up there, we’ve got to get rid of it — ” She raised her wand, pointed it at Harry, and
whispered, “Levicorpus.” Hoisted into the air by his ankle, Harry hit a suit of
armor and replicas burst out of it like white-hot
bodies, filling the cramped space. With screams of
pain Ron, Hermione, and the two goblins were
knocked aside into other objects, which also began to
replicate. Half buried in a rising tide of red-hot
treasure, they struggled and yelled as Harry thrust
the sword through the handle of Hufflepuff’s cup,
hooking it onto the blade. “Impervius\” screeched Hermione in an attempt to
protect herself, Ron, and the goblins from the burning
metal. Then the worst scream yet made Harry look down: Ron and Hermione were waist-deep in treasure,
struggling to keep Bogrod from slipping beneath the
rising tide, but Griphook had sunk out of sight and
nothing but the tips of a few long fingers were left in
view. Harry seized Griphook’s fingers and pulled. The
blistered goblin emerged by degrees, howling.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Liberacorpus\” yelled Harry, and with a crash he and
Griphook landed on the surface of the swelling
treasure, and the sword flew out of Harry’s hand. “Get it!” Harry yelled, fighting the pain of the hot
metal on his skin, as Griphook clambered onto his
shoulders again, determined to avoid the swelling
mass of red-hot objects. “Where’s the sword? It had
the cup on it!” The clanking on the other side of the door was
growing deafening — it was too late — “There!” It was Griphook who had seen it and Griphook who
lunged, and in that instant Harry knew that the
goblin had never expected them to keep their word.
One hand holding tightly to a fistful of Harry’s hair, to
make sure he did not fall into the heaving sea of
burning gold, Griphook seized the hilt of the sword
and swung it high out of Harry’s reach. The tiny golden cup, skewered by the handle on the
sword’s blade, was flung into the air. The goblin still
astride him, Harry dived and caught it, and although
he could feel it scalding his flesh he did not relinquish
it, even while countless Hufflepuff cups burst from
his fist, raining down upon him as the entrance of the
vault opened up again and he found himself sliding
uncontrollably on an expanding avalanche of fiery
gold and silver that bore him, Ron, and Hermione into
the outer chamber. Hardly aware of the pain from the burns covering his
body, and still borne along on the swell of replicating
treasure, Harry shoved the cup into his pocket and
reached up to retrieve the sword, but Griphook was
gone. Sliding from Harry’s shoulders the moment he Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
could, he had sprinted for cover amongst the
surrounding goblins, brandishing the sword and
crying, “Thieves! Thieves! Help! Thieves!” He vanished
into the midst of the advancing crowd, all of whom
were holding daggers and who accepted him without
question. Slipping on the hot metal, Harry struggled to his feet
and knew that the only way out was through. “Stupefyl” he bellowed, and Ron and Hermione joined
in: Jets of red light flew into the crowd of goblins, and
some toppled over, but others advanced, and Harry
saw several wizard guards running around the
corner. The tethered dragon let out a roar, and a gush of
flame flew over the goblins: The wizards fled, doubled-
up, back the way they had come, and inspiration, or
madness, came to Harry. Pointing his wand at the
thick cuffs chaining the beast to the floor, he yelled,
“Relashiol” The cuffs broke open with loud bangs. “This way!” Harry yelled, and still shooting Stunning
Spells at the advancing goblins, he sprinted toward
the blind dragon. “Harry — Harry — what are you doing?” cried
Hermione. “Get up, climb up, come on — ” The dragon had not realized that it was free: Harry’s
foot found the crook of its hind leg and he pulled
himself up onto its back. The scales were hard as
steel; it did not even seem to feel him. He stretched
out an arm; Hermione hoisted herself up; Ron Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
climbed on behind them, and a second later the
dragon became aware that it was untethered. With a roar it reared: Harry dug in his knees,
clutching as tightly as he could to the jagged scales
as the wings opened, knocking the shrieking goblins
aside like skittles, and it soared into the air. Harry,
Ron, and Hermione, flat on its back, scraped against
the ceiling as it dived toward the passage opening,
while the pursuing goblins hurled daggers that
glanced off its flanks. “Well never get out, it’s too big!” Hermione screamed,
but the dragon opened its mouth and belched flame
again, blasting the tunnel, whose floors and ceiling
cracked and crumbled. By sheer force the dragon
clawed and fought its way through. Harry’s eyes were
shut tight against the heat and dust: Deafened by the
crashing of rock and the dragon’s roars, he could only
cling to its back, expecting to be shaken off at any
moment; then he heard Hermione yelling, “Defodiol” She was helping the dragon enlarge the passageway,
carving out the ceiling as it struggled upward toward
the fresher air, away from the shrieking and clanking
goblins: Harry and Ron copied her, blasting the
ceiling apart with more gouging spells. They passed
the underground lake, and the great crawling,
snarling beast seemed to sense freedom and space
ahead of it, and behind them the passage was full of
the dragon’s thrashing, spiked tail, of great lumps of
rock, gigantic fractured stalactites, and the clanking
of the goblins seemed to be growing more muffled,
while ahead, the dragon’s fire kept their progress
clear — And then at last, by the combined force of their spells
and the dragon’s brute strength, they had blasted
their way out of the passage into the marble hallway.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Goblins and wizards shrieked and ran for cover, and
finally the dragon had room to stretch its wings:
Turning its horned head toward the cool outside air it
could smell beyond the entrance, it took off, and with
Harry, Ron, and Hermione still clinging to its back, it
forced its way through the metal doors, leaving them
buckled and hanging from their hinges, as it
staggered into Diagon Alley and launched itself into
the sky.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE FINAL HIDING PLACE There was no means of steering; the dragon could not
see where it was going, and Harry knew that if it
turned sharply or rolled in midair they would find it
impossible to cling onto its broad back. Nevertheless,
as they climbed higher and higher, London unfurling
below them like a gray-and-green map, Harry’s
overwhelming feeling was of gratitude for an escape
that had seemed impossible. Crouching low over the
beast’s neck, he clung tight to the metallic scales, and
the cool breeze was soothing on his burned and
blistered skin, the dragon’s wings beating the air like
the sails of a windmill. Behind him, whether from
delight or fear he could not tell, Ron kept swearing at
the top of his voice, and Hermione seemed to be
sobbing. After five minutes or so, Harry lost some of his
immediate dread that the dragon was going to throw
them off, for it seemed intent on nothing but getting
as far away from its underground prison as possible;
but the question of how and when they were to
dismount remained rather frightening. He had no idea  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling how long dragons could fly without landing, nor how
this particular dragon, which could barely see, would
locate a good place to put down. He glanced around
constantly, imagining that he could feel his scar
prickling. ... How long would it be before Voldemort knew that they
had broken into the Lestranges’ vault? How soon
would the goblins of Gringotts notify Bellatrix? How
quickly would they realize what had been taken? And
then, when they discovered that the golden cup was
missing? Voldemort would know, at last, that they
were hunting Horcruxes. ... The dragon seemed to crave cooler and fresher air: It
climbed steadily until they were flying through wisps
of chilly cloud, and Harry could no longer make out
the little colored dots which were cars pouring in and
out of the capital. On and on they flew, over
countryside parceled out in patches of green and
brown, over roads and rivers winding through the
landscape like strips of matte and glossy ribbon. “What do you reckon it’s looking for?” Ron yelled as
they flew farther and farther north. “No idea,” Harry bellowed back. His hands were numb
with cold but he did not dare attempt to shift his grip.
He had been wondering for some time what they
would do if they saw the coast sail beneath them, if
the dragon headed for open sea; he was cold and
numb, not to mention desperately hungry and thirsty.
When, he wondered, had the beast itself last eaten?
Surely it would need sustenance before long? And
what if, at that point, it realized it had three highly
edible humans sitting on its back? The sun slipped lower in the sky, which was turning
indigo; and still the dragon flew, cities and towns  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
gliding out of sight beneath them, its enormous
shadow sliding over the earth like a great dark cloud.
Every part of Harry ached with the effort of holding on
to the dragon’s back. “Is it my imagination,” shouted Ron after a
considerable stretch of silence, “or are we losing
height?” Harry looked down and saw deep green mountains
and lakes, coppery in the sunset. The landscape
seemed to grow larger and more detailed as he
squinted over the side of the dragon, and he
wondered whether it had divined the presence of fresh
water by the flashes of reflected sunlight. Lower and lower the dragon flew, in great spiraling
circles, honing in, it seemed, upon one of the smaller
lakes. “I say we jump when it gets low enough!” Harry called
back to the others. “Straight into the water before it
realizes we’re here!” They agreed, Hermione a little faintly, and now Harry
could see the dragon’s wide yellow underbelly rippling
in the surface of the water. “NOW!” He slithered over the side of the dragon and
plummeted feetfirst toward the surface of the lake;
the drop was greater than he had estimated and he
hit the water hard, plunging like a stone into a
freezing, green, reed-filled world. He kicked toward
the surface and emerged, panting, to see enormous
ripples emanating in circles from the places where
Ron and Hermione had fallen. The dragon did not
seem to have noticed anything: It was already fifty Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
feet away, swooping low over the lake to scoop up
water in its scarred snout. As Ron and Hermione
emerged, spluttering and gasping, from the depths of
the lake, the dragon flew on, its wings beating hard,
and landed at last on a distant bank. Harry, Ron, and Hermione struck out for the opposite
shore. The lake did not seem to be deep: Soon it was
more a question of fighting their way through reeds
and mud than swimming, and at last they flopped,
sodden, panting, and exhausted, onto slippery grass. Hermione collapsed, coughing and shuddering.
Though Harry could have happily lain down and
slept, he staggered to his feet, drew out his wand, and
started casting the usual protective spells around
them. When he had finished, he joined the others. It was the
first time that he had seen them properly since
escaping from the vault. Both had angry red burns all
over their faces and arms, and their clothing was
singed away in places. They were wincing as they
dabbed essence of dittany onto their many injuries.
Hermione handed Harry the bottle, then pulled out
three bottles of pumpkin juice she had brought from
Shell Cottage and clean, dry robes for all of them. They changed and then gulped down the juice. “Well, on the upside,” said Ron finally, who was
sitting watching the skin on his hands regrow, “we got
the Horcrux. On the downside — ” “ — no sword,” said Harry through gritted teeth, as he
dripped dittany through the singed hole in his jeans
onto the angry burn beneath. “No sword,” repeated Ron. “That double-crossing little
scab ...”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry pulled the Horcrux from the pocket of the wet
jacket he had just taken off and set it down on the
grass in front of them. Glinting in the sun, it drew
their eyes as they swigged their bottles of juice. “At least we can’t wear it this time, that’d look a bit
weird hanging round our necks,” said Ron, wiping his
mouth on the back of his hand. Hermione looked across the lake to the far bank,
where the dragon was still drinking. “What’ll happen to it, do you think?” she asked. “Will
it be all right?” “You sound like Hagrid,” said Ron. “It’s a dragon,
Hermione, it can look after itself. It’s us we need to
worry about.” “What do you mean?” “Well, I don’t know how to break this to you,” said
Ron, “but I think they might have noticed we broke
into Gringotts.” All three of them started to laugh, and once started, it
was difficult to stop. Harry’s ribs ached, he felt
lightheaded with hunger, but he lay back on the grass
beneath the reddening sky and laughed until his
throat was raw. “What are we going to do, though?” said Hermione
finally, hiccuping herself back to seriousness. “He’ll
know, won’t he? You- Know- Who will know we know
about his Horcruxes!” “Maybe they’ll be too scared to tell him?” said Ron
hopefully. “Maybe they’ll cover up — ”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The sky, the smell of lake water, the sound of Ron’s
voice were extinguished: Pain cleaved Harry’s head
like a sword stroke. He was standing in a dimly lit
room, and a semicircle of wizards faced him, and on
the floor at his feet knelt a small, quaking figure. “What did you say to me?” His voice was high and
cold, but fury and fear burned inside him. The one
thing he had dreaded — but it could not be true, he
could not see how ... The goblin was trembling, unable to meet the red eyes
high above his. “Say it again!” murmured Voldemort. “ Say it again).” “M-my Lord,” stammered the goblin, its black eyes
wide with terror, “m-my Lord ... we t-tried t-to st-stop
them. ... Im-impostors, my Lord ... broke — broke
into the — into the Lestranges’ v-vault. ...” “Impostors? What impostors? I thought Gringotts had
ways of revealing impostors? Who were they?” “It was ... it was . . . the P-Potter b-boy and t-two
accomplices. ...” “And they took?” he said, his voice rising, a terrible
fear gripping him. “Tell me! What did they take?” “A ... a s-small golden c-cup, m-my Lord ...” The scream of rage, of denial left him as if it were a
stranger’s: He was crazed, frenzied, it could not be
true, it was impossible, nobody had ever known: How
was it possible that the boy could have discovered his
secret?  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The Elder Wand slashed through the air and green
light erupted through the room; the kneeling goblin
rolled over, dead; the watching wizards scattered
before him, terrified: Bellatrix and Lucius Malfoy
threw others behind them in their race for the door,
and again and again his wand fell, and those who
were left were slain, all of them, for bringing him this
news, for hearing about the golden cup — Alone amongst the dead he stormed up and down,
and they passed before him in vision: his treasures,
his safeguards, his anchors to immortality — the
diary was destroyed and the cup was stolen: What if,
what if, the boy knew about the others? Could he
know, had he already acted, had he traced more of
them? Was Dumbledore at the root of this?
Dumbledore, who had always suspected him;
Dumbledore, dead on his orders; Dumbledore, whose
wand was his now, yet who reached out from the
ignominy of death through the boy, the boy — But surely if the boy had destroyed any of his
Horcruxes, he, Lord Voldemort, would have known,
would have felt it? He, the greatest wizard of them all;
he, the most powerful; he, the killer of Dumbledore
and of how many other worthless, nameless men:
How could Lord Voldemort not have known, if he,
himself, most important and precious, had been
attacked, mutilated? True, he had not felt it when the diary had been
destroyed, but he had thought that was because he
had no body to feel, being less than ghost. ... No,
surely, the rest were safe. ... The other Horcruxes
must be intact. ... But he must know, he must be sure. ... He paced the
room, kicking aside the goblin’s corpse as he passed,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
and the pictures blurred and burned in his boiling
brain: the lake, the shack, and Hogwarts — A modicum of calm cooled his rage now: How could
the boy know that he had hidden the ring in the
Gaunt shack? No one had ever known him to be
related to the Gaunts, he had hidden the connection,
the killings had never been traced to him: The ring,
surely, was safe. And how could the boy, or anybody else, know about
the cave or penetrate its protection? The idea of the
locket being stolen was absurd. ... As for the school: He alone knew where in Hogwarts
he had stowed the Horcrux, because he alone had
plumbed the deepest secrets of that place. ... And there was still Nagini, who must remain close
now, no longer sent to do his bidding, under his
protection. ... But to be sure, to be utterly sure, he must return to
each of his hiding places, he must redouble protection
around each of his Horcruxes. ... A job, like the quest
for the Elder Wand, that he must undertake alone ... Which should he visit first, which was in most
danger? An old unease flickered inside him.
Dumbledore had known his middle name. ...
Dumbledore might have made the connection with
the Gaunts. ... Their abandoned home was, perhaps,
the least secure of his hiding places, it was there that
he would go first. ... The lake, surely impossible ... though was there a
slight possibility that Dumbledore might have known
some of his past misdeeds, through the orphanage.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
And Hogwarts . . . but he knew that his Horcrux there
was safe; it would be impossible for Potter to enter
Hogsmeade without detection, let alone the school.
Nevertheless, it would be prudent to alert Snape to
the fact that the boy might try to reenter the castle. ...
To tell Snape why the boy might return would be
foolish, of course; it had been a grave mistake to trust
Bellatrix and Malfoy: Didn’t their stupidity and
carelessness prove how unwise it was ever to trust? He would visit the Gaunt shack first, then, and take
Nagini with him: He would not be parted from the
snake anymore . . . and he strode from the room,
through the hall, and out into the dark garden where
the fountain played; he called the snake in
Parseltongue and it slithered out to join him like a
long shadow. ... Harry’s eyes flew open as he wrenched himself back
to the present: He was lying on the bank of the lake in
the setting sun, and Ron and Hermione were looking
down at him. Judging by their worried looks, and by
the continued pounding of his scar, his sudden
excursion into Voldemort’s mind had not passed
unnoticed. He struggled up, shivering, vaguely
surprised that he was still wet to his skin, and saw
the cup lying innocently in the grass before him, and
the lake, deep blue shot with gold in the failing sun. “He knows.” His own voice sounded strange and low
after Voldemort’s high screams. “He knows, and he’s
going to check where the others are, and the last
one,” he was already on his feet, “is at Hogwarts. I
knew it. I knew it.” “What?” Ron was gaping at him; Hermione sat up, looking
worried.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“But what did you see? How do you know?” “I saw him find out about the cup, I — I was in his
head, he’s” — Harry remembered the killings — “he’s
seriously angry, and scared too, he can’t understand
how we knew, and now he’s going to check the others
are safe, the ring first. He thinks the Hogwarts one is
safest, because Snape’s there, because it’ll be so hard
not to be seen getting in, I think he’ll check that one
last, but he could still be there within hours — ” “Did you see where in Hogwarts it is?” asked Ron,
now scrambling to his feet too. “No, he was concentrating on warning Snape, he
didn’t think about exactly where it is — ” “Wait, wait\” cried Hermione as Ron caught up the
Horcrux and Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloak
again. “We can’t just go, we haven’t got a plan, we
need to — ” “We need to get going,” said Harry firmly. He had
been hoping to sleep, looking forward to getting into
the new tent, but that was impossible now. “Can you
imagine what he’s going to do once he realizes the
ring and the locket are gone? What if he moves the
Hogwarts Horcrux, decides it isn’t safe enough?” “But how are we going to get in?” “Well go to Hogsmeade,” said Harry, “and try to work
something out once we see what the protection
around the school’s like. Get under the Cloak,
Hermione, I want to stick together this time.” “But we don’t really fit — ” “It’ll be dark, no one’s going to notice our feet.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
The flapping of enormous wings echoed across the
black water: The dragon had drunk its fill and risen
into the air. They paused in their preparations to
watch it climb higher and higher, now black against
the rapidly darkening sky, until it vanished over a
nearby mountain. Then Hermione walked forward
and took her place between the other two. Harry
pulled the Cloak down as far as it would go, and
together they turned on the spot into the crushing
darkness.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling THE MISSING MIRROR Harry’s feet touched road. He saw the achingly
familiar Hogsmeade High Street: dark shop fronts,
and the outline of black mountains beyond the
village, and the curve in the road ahead that led off
toward Hogwarts, and light spilling from the windows
of the Three Broomsticks, and with a lurch of the
heart he remembered, with piercing accuracy, how he
had landed here nearly a year before, supporting a
desperately weak Dumbledore; all this in a second,
upon landing — and then, even as he relaxed his grip
upon Ron’s and Hermione’s arms, it happened. The air was rent by a scream that sounded like
Voldemort’s when he had realized the cup had been
stolen: It tore at every nerve in Harry’s body, and he
knew immediately that their appearance had caused
it. Even as he looked at the other two beneath the
Cloak, the door of the Three Broomsticks burst open
and a dozen cloaked and hooded Death Eaters
dashed into the street, their wands aloft.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling Harry seized Ron’s wrist as he raised his wand; there
were too many of them to Stun: Even attempting it
would give away their position. One of the Death
Eaters waved his wand and the scream stopped, still
echoing around the distant mountains. “Accio Cloak).” roared one of the Death Eaters. Harry seized its folds, but it made no attempt to
escape: The Summoning Charm had not worked on it. “Not under your wrapper, then, Potter?” yelled the
Death Eater who had tried the charm, and then to his
fellows, “Spread out. He’s here.” Six of the Death Eaters ran toward them: Harry, Ron,
and Hermione backed as quickly as possible down the
nearest side street, and the Death Eaters missed
them by inches. They waited in the darkness,
listening to the footsteps running up and down,
beams of light flying along the street from the Death
Eaters’ searching wands. “Let’s just leave!” Hermione whispered. “Disapparate
now!” “Great idea,” said Ron, but before Harry could reply a
Death Eater shouted, “We know you’re here, Potter, and there’s no getting
away! We’ll find you!” “They were ready for us,” whispered Harry. “They set
up that spell to tell them we’d come. I reckon they’ve
done something to keep us here, trap us — ” “What about dementors?” called another Death Eater.
“Let ’em have free rein, they’d find him quick enough!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“The Dark Lord wants Potter dead by no hand but his “ — an’ dementors won’t kill him! The Dark Lord
wants Potter’s life, not his soul. He’ll be easier to kill if
he’s been Kissed first!” There were noises of agreement. Dread filled Harry: To repel dementors they would have to produce
Patronuses, which would give them away
immediately. “We’re going to have to try to Disapparate, Harry!”
Hermione whispered. Even as she said it, he felt the unnatural cold begin to
steal over the street. Light was sucked from the
environment right up to the stars, which vanished. In
the pitch-blackness, he felt Hermione take hold of his
arm and together, they turned on the spot. The air through which they needed to move seemed to
have become solid: They could not Disapparate; the
Death Eaters had cast their charms well. The cold
was biting deeper and deeper into Harry’s flesh. He,
Ron, and Hermione retreated down the side street,
groping their way along the wall, trying not to make a
sound. Then, around the corner, gliding noiselessly,
came dementors, ten or more of them, visible because
they were of a denser darkness than their
surroundings, with their black cloaks and their
scabbed and rotting hands. Could they sense fear in
the vicinity? Harry was sure of it: They seemed to be
coming more quickly now, taking those dragging,
rattling breaths he detested, tasting despair on the
air, closing in — He raised his wand: He could not, would not, suffer
the Dementor’s Kiss, whatever happened afterward. It  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
was of Ron and Hermione that he thought as he
whispered, “Expecto Patronum).” The silver stag burst from his wand and charged: The
dementors scattered and there was a triumphant yell
from somewhere out of sight. “It’s him, down there, down there, I saw his Patronus,
it was a stag! The dementors had retreated, the stars were popping
out again, and the footsteps of the Death Eaters were
becoming louder; but before Harry in his panic could
decide what to do, there was a grinding of bolts
nearby, a door opened on the left-hand side of the
narrow street, and a rough voice said, “Potter, in here,
quick!” He obeyed without hesitation: The three of them
hurtled through the open doorway. “Upstairs, keep the Cloak on, keep quiet!” muttered a
tall figure, passing them on his way into the street
and slamming the door behind him. Harry had had no idea where they were, but now he
saw, by the stuttering light of a single candle, the
grubby, sawdust- strewn bar of the Hog’s Head Inn.
They ran behind the counter and through a second
doorway, which led to a rickety wooden staircase that
they climbed as fast as they could. The stairs opened
onto a sitting room with a threadbare carpet and a
small fireplace, above which hung a single large oil
painting of a blonde girl who gazed out at the room
with a kind of vacant sweetness. Shouts reached them from the street below. Still
wearing the Invisibility Cloak, they crept toward the
grimy window and looked down. Their savior, whom  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry now recognized as the Hog’s Head’s barman,
was the only person not wearing a hood. “So what?” he was bellowing into one of the hooded
faces. “So what? You send dementors down my street,
I’ll send a Patronus back at ’em! I’m not having ’em
near me, I’ve told you that, I’m not having it!” “That wasn’t your Patronus!” said a Death Eater. “That was a stag, it was Potter’s!” “Stag!” roared the barman, and he pulled out a wand.
“I have seen your dreams, Ronald Weasley, and I have
seen your fears. All you desire is possible, but all that
you dread is also possible. ...” “Stab!” shouted Harry; his voice echoed off the
surrounding trees, the sword point trembled, and Ron
gazed down into Riddle’s eyes. “ Least loved, always, by the mother who craved a
daughter . . . Least loved, now, by the girl who prefers
your friend . . . Second best, always, eternally
overshadowed ...” “Ron, stab it now!” Harry bellowed: He could feel the
locket quivering in his grip and was scared of what
was coming. Ron raised the sword still higher, and as
he did so, Riddle’s eyes gleamed scarlet. Out of the locket’s two windows, out of the eyes, there
bloomed, like two grotesque bubbles, the heads of
Harry and Hermione, weirdly distorted. Ron yelled in shock and backed away as the figures
blossomed out of the locket, first chests, then waists,
then legs, until they stood in the locket, side by side
like trees with a common root, swaying over Ron and
the real Harry, who had snatched his fingers away
from the locket as it burned, suddenly, white-hot. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Ron!” he shouted, but the Riddle-Harry was now
speaking with Voldemort’s voice and Ron was gazing,
mesmerized, into its face. “ Why return? We were better without you, happier
without you, glad of your absence. . . . We laughed at
your stupidity, your cowardice, your presumption — ” “ Presumption?’ echoed the Riddle-Hermione, who was
more beautiful and yet more terrible than the real
Hermione: She swayed, cackling, before Ron, who
looked horrified yet transfixed, the sword hanging
pointlessly at his side. “ Who could look at you, who
would ever look at you, beside Harry Potter? What
have you ever done, compared with the Chosen One?
What are you, compared with the Boy Who Lived?” “Ron, stab it, STAB IT!” Harry yelled, but Ron did not
move: His eyes were wide, and the Riddle-Harry and
the Riddle-Hermione were reflected in them, their hair
swirling like flames, their eyes shining red, their
voices lifted in an evil duet. “ Your mother confessed,” sneered Riddle-Harry, while
Riddle-Hermione jeered, “that she would have
preferred me as a son, would be glad to exchange ...” “Who wouldn’t prefer him, what woman would take
you, you are nothing, nothing, nothing to him,” crooned
Riddle-Hermione, and she stretched like a snake and
entwined herself around Riddle-Harry, wrapping him
in a close embrace: Their lips met. On the ground in front of them, Ron’s face filled with
anguish. He raised the sword high, his arms shaking. “Do it, Ron!” Harry yelled.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Ron looked toward him, and Harry thought he saw a
trace of scarlet in his eyes. “Ron — ?” The sword flashed, plunged: Harry threw himself out
of the way, there was a clang of metal and a long,
drawn-out scream. Harry whirled around, slipping in
the snow, wand held ready to defend himself: but
there was nothing to fight. The monstrous versions of himself and Hermione
were gone: There was only Ron, standing there with
the sword held slackly in his hand, looking down at
the shattered remains of the locket on the flat rock. Slowly, Harry walked back to him, hardly knowing
what to say or do. Ron was breathing heavily: His
eyes were no longer red at all, but their normal blue;
they were also wet. Harry stooped, pretending he had not seen, and
picked up the broken Horcrux. Ron had pierced the
glass in both windows: Riddle’s eyes were gone, and
the stained silk lining of the locket was smoking
slightly. The thing that had lived in the Horcrux had
vanished; torturing Ron had been its final act. The sword clanged as Ron dropped it. He had sunk to
his knees, his head in his arms. He was shaking, but
not, Harry realized, from cold. Harry crammed the
broken locket into his pocket, knelt down beside Ron,
and placed a hand cautiously on his shoulder. He
took it as a good sign that Ron did not throw it off. “After you left,” he said in a low voice, grateful for the
fact that Ron’s face was hidden, “she cried for a week.
Probably longer, only she didn’t want me to see. There  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
were loads of nights when we never even spoke to
each other. With you gone ...” He could not finish; it was only now that Ron was
here again that Harry fully realized how much his
absence had cost them. “She’s like my sister,” he went on. “I love her like a
sister and I reckon she feels the same way about me.
It’s always been like that. I thought you knew.” Ron did not respond, but turned his face away from
Harry and wiped his nose noisily on his sleeve. Harry
got to his feet again and walked to where Ron’s
enormous rucksack lay yards away, discarded as Ron
had run toward the pool to save Harry from drowning.
He hoisted it onto his own back and walked back to
Ron, who clambered to his feet as Harry approached,
eyes bloodshot but otherwise composed. “I’m sorry,” he said in a thick voice. “I’m sorry I left. I
know I was a — a — ” He looked around at the darkness, as if hoping a bad
enough word would swoop down upon him and claim
him. “You’ve sort of made up for it tonight,” said Harry.
“Getting the sword. Finishing off the Horcrux. Saving
my life.” “That makes me sound a lot cooler than I was,” Ron
mumbled. “Stuff like that always sounds cooler than it really
was,” said Harry. “I’ve been trying to tell you that for
years.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Simultaneously they walked forward and hugged,
Harry gripping the still-sopping back of Ron’s jacket. “And now,” said Harry as they broke apart, “all we’ve
got to do is find the tent again.” But it was not difficult. Though the walk through the
dark forest with the doe had seemed lengthy, with
Ron by his side the journey back seemed to take a
surprisingly short time. Harry could not wait to wake
Hermione, and it was with quickening excitement that
he entered the tent, Ron lagging a little behind him. It was gloriously warm after the pool and the forest,
the only illumination the bluebell flames still
shimmering in a bowl on the floor. Hermione was fast
asleep, curled up under her blankets, and did not
move until Harry had said her name several times. “Hermionel” She stirred, then sat up quickly, pushing her hair out
of her face. “What’s wrong? Harry? Are you all right?” “It’s okay, everything’s fine. More than fine. I’m great.
There’s someone here.” “What do you mean? Who — ?” She saw Ron, who stood there holding the sword and
dripping onto the threadbare carpet. Harry backed
into a shadowy corner, slipped off Ron’s rucksack,
and attempted to blend in with the canvas. Hermione slid out of her bunk and moved like a
sleepwalker toward Ron, her eyes upon his pale face.
She stopped right in front of him, her lips slightly  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
parted, her eyes wide. Ron gave a weak, hopeful smile
and half raised his arms. Hermione launched herself forward and started
punching every inch of him that she could reach. “Ouch — ow — gerroff! What the — ? Hermione —
OW!” “You — complete — arse — Ronald — Weasley!” She punctuated every word with a blow: Ron backed
away, shielding his head as Hermione advanced. “You — crawl — back — here — after — weeks — and
— weeks — oh, where’s my wand?” She looked as though ready to wrestle it out of
Harry’s hands and he reacted instinctively. “Protegol” The invisible shield erupted between Ron and
Hermione: The force of it knocked her backward onto
the floor. Spitting hair out of her mouth, she leapt up
again. “Hermione!” said Harry. “Calm — ” “I will not calm down!” she screamed. Never before
had he seen her lose control like this; she looked
quite demented. “Give me back my wand! Give it back
to me\” “Hermione, will you please — ” “Don’t you tell me what to do, Harry Potter!” she
screeched. “Don’t you dare! Give it back now! And
YOU!”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
She was pointing at Ron in dire accusation: It was
like a malediction, and Harry could not blame Ron for
retreating several steps. “I came running after you! I called you! I begged you
to come back!” “I know,” Ron said, “Hermione, I’m sorry, I’m really — “Oh, you’re sorry!” She laughed, a high-pitched, out-of-control sound;
Ron looked at Harry for help, but Harry merely
grimaced his helplessness. “You come back after weeks — weeks — and you
think it’s all going to be all right if you just say
sorry?” “Well, what else can I say?” Ron shouted, and Harry
was glad that Ron was fighting back. “Oh, I don’t know!” yelled Hermione with awful
sarcasm. “Rack your brains, Ron, that should only
take a couple of seconds — ” “Hermione,” interjected Harry, who considered this a
low blow, “he just saved my — ” “I don’t care!” she screamed. “I don’t care what he’s
done! Weeks and weeks, we could have been dead for
all he knew — ” “I knew you weren’t dead!” bellowed Ron, drowning
her voice for the first time, and approaching as close
as he could with the Shield Charm between them.
“Harry’s all over the Prophet, all over the radio, they’re
looking for you everywhere, all these rumors and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
mental stories, I knew I’d hear straight off if you were
dead, you don’t know what it’s been like — ” “What it’s been like for you?” Her voice was now so shrill only bats would be able to
hear it soon, but she had reached a level of
indignation that rendered her temporarily speechless,
and Ron seized his opportunity. “I wanted to come back the minute I’d Disapparated,
but I walked straight into a gang of Snatchers,
Hermione, and I couldn’t go anywhere!” “A gang of what?” asked Harry, as Hermione threw
herself down into a chair with her arms and legs
crossed so tightly it seemed unlikely that she would
unravel them for several years. “Snatchers,” said Ron. “They’re everywhere — gangs
trying to earn gold by rounding up Muggle-borns and
blood traitors, there’s a reward from the Ministry for
everyone captured. I was on my own and I look like I
might be school age; they got really excited, thought I
was a Muggle-born in hiding. I had to talk fast to get
out of being dragged to the Ministry.” “What did you say to them?” “Told them I was Stan Shunpike. First person I could
think of.” “And they believed that?” “They weren’t the brightest. One of them was
definitely part troll, the smell off him. ...” Ron glanced at Hermione, clearly hopeful she might
soften at this small instance of humor, but her  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
expression remained stony above her tightly knotted
limbs. “Anyway, they had a row about whether I was Stan or
not. It was a bit pathetic to be honest, but there were
still five of them and only one of me and they’d taken
my wand. Then two of them got into a fight and while
the others were distracted I managed to hit the one
holding me in the stomach, grabbed his wand,
Disarmed the bloke holding mine, and Disapparated. I didn’t do it so well, Splinched myself again” — Ron
held up his right hand to show two missing
fingernails; Hermione raised her eyebrows coldly —
“and I came out miles from where you were. By the
time I got back to that bit of riverbank where we’d
been ... you’d gone.” “Gosh, what a gripping story,” Hermione said in the
lofty voice she adopted when wishing to wound. “You
must have been simply terrified. Meanwhile we went
to Godric’s Hollow and, let’s think, what happened
there, Harry? Oh yes, You-Know- Who’s snake turned
up, it nearly killed both of us, and then You-Know-
Who himself arrived and missed us by about a
second.” “What?” Ron said, gaping from her to Harry, but
Hermione ignored him. “Imagine losing fingernails, Harry! That really puts
our sufferings into perspective, doesn’t it?” “Hermione,” said Harry quietly, “Ron just saved my
life.” She appeared not to have heard him. “One thing I would like to know, though,” she said,
fixing her eyes on a spot a foot over Ron’s head. “How  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
exactly did you find us tonight? That’s important. Once we know, we’ll be able to make sure we’re not
visited by anyone else we don’t want to see.” Ron glared at her, then pulled a small silver object
from his jeans pocket. “This.” She had to look at Ron to see what he was showing
them. “The Deluminator?” she asked, so surprised she
forgot to look cold and fierce. “It doesn’t just turn the lights on and off,” said Ron. “I
don’t know how it works or why it happened then and
not any other time, because I’ve been wanting to come
back ever since I left. But I was listening to the radio
really early on Christmas morning and I heard ... I
heard you.” He was looking at Hermione. “You heard me on the radio?” she asked
incredulously. “No, I heard you coming out of my pocket. Your
voice,” he held up the Deluminator again, “came out
of this.” “And what exactly did I say?” asked Hermione, her
tone somewhere between skepticism and curiosity. “My name. ‘Ron.’ And you said ... something about a
wand. ...” Hermione turned a fiery shade of scarlet. Harry
remembered: It had been the first time Ron’s name  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
had been said aloud by either of them since the day
he had left; Hermione had mentioned it when talking
about repairing Harry’s wand. “So I took it out,” Ron went on, looking at the
Deluminator, “and it didn’t seem different or
anything, but I was sure I’d heard you. So I clicked it.
And the light went out in my room, but another light
appeared right outside the window.” Ron raised his empty hand and pointed in front of
him, his eyes focused on something neither Harry nor
Hermione could see. “It was a ball of light, kind of pulsing, and bluish, like
that light you get around a Portkey, you know?” “Yeah,” said Harry and Hermione together
automatically. “I knew this was it,” said Ron. “I grabbed my stuff and
packed it, then I put on my rucksack and went out
into the garden. “The little ball of light was hovering there, waiting for
me, and when I came out it bobbed along a bit and I
followed it behind the shed and then it ... well, it went
inside me.” “Sorry?” said Harry, sure he had not heard correctly. “It sort of floated toward me,” said Ron, illustrating
the movement with his free index finger, “right to my
chest, and then — it just went straight through. It
was here,” he touched a point close to his heart, “I
could feel it, it was hot. And once it was inside me I
knew what I was supposed to do, I knew it would take
me where I needed to go. So I Disapparated and came  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
out on the side of a hill. There was snow everywhere. “We were there,” said Harry. “We spent two nights
there, and the second night I kept thinking I could
hear someone moving around in the dark and calling
out!” “Yeah, well, that would’ve been me,” said Ron. “Your
protective spells work, anyway, because I couldn’t see
you and I couldn’t hear you. I was sure you were
around, though, so in the end I got in my sleeping bag
and waited for one of you to appear. I thought you’d
have to show yourselves when you packed up the
tent.” “No, actually,” said Hermione. “We’ve been
Disapparating under the Invisibility Cloak as an extra
precaution. And we left really early, because, as Harry
says, we’d heard somebody blundering around.” “Well, I stayed on that hill all day,” said Ron. “I kept
hoping you’d appear. But when it started to get dark I
knew I must have missed you, so I clicked the
Deluminator again, the blue light came out and went
inside me, and I Disapparated and arrived here in
these woods. I still couldn’t see you, so I just had to
hope one of you would show yourselves in the end —
and Harry did. Well, I saw the doe first, obviously.” “You saw the what?” said Hermione sharply. They explained what had happened, and as the story
of the silver doe and the sword in the pool unfolded,
Hermione frowned from one to the other of them,
concentrating so hard she forgot to keep her limbs
locked together.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“But it must have been a Patronus!” she said.
“Couldn’t you see who was casting it? Didn’t you see
anyone? And it led you to the sword! I can’t believe
this! Then what happened?” Ron explained how he had watched Harry jump into
the pool and had waited for him to resurface; how he
had realized that something was wrong, dived in, and
saved Harry, then returned for the sword. He got as
far as the opening of the locket, then hesitated, and
Harry cut in. “ — and Ron stabbed it with the sword.” “And ... and it went? Just like that?” she whispered. “Well, it — it screamed,” said Harry with half a glance
at Ron. “Here.” He threw the locket into her lap; gingerly she picked it
up and examined its punctured windows. Deciding that it was at last safe to do so, Harry
removed the Shield Charm with a wave of Hermione’s
wand and turned to Ron. “Did you just say you got away from the Snatchers
with a spare wand?” “What?” said Ron, who had been watching Hermione
examining the locket. “Oh — oh yeah.” He tugged open a buckle on his rucksack and pulled
a short, dark wand out of its pocket. “Here. I figured
it’s always handy to have a backup.” “You were right,” said Harry, holding out his hand.
“Mine’s broken.”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You’re kidding?” Ron said, but at that moment
Hermione got to her feet, and he looked apprehensive
again. Hermione put the vanquished Horcrux into the
beaded bag, then climbed back into her bed and
settled down without another word. Ron passed Harry the new wand. “About the best you could hope for, I think,”
murmured Harry. “Yeah,” said Ron. “Could’ve been worse. Remember
those birds she set on me?” “I still haven’t ruled it out,” came Hermione’s muffled
voice from beneath her blankets, but Harry saw Ron
smiling slightly as he pulled his maroon pajamas out
of his rucksack.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling XEN OPHILIUS LOVEGOOD Harry had not expected Hermione’s anger to abate
overnight, and was therefore unsurprised that she
communicated mainly by dirty looks and pointed
silences the next morning. Ron responded by
maintaining an unnaturally somber demeanor in her
presence as an outward sign of continuing remorse. In fact, when all three of them were together Harry
felt like the only non-mourner at a poorly attended
funeral. During those few moments he spent alone
with Harry, however (collecting water and searching
the undergrowth for mushrooms), Ron became
shamelessly cheery. “Someone helped us,” he kept saying. “Someone sent
that doe. Someone’s on our side. One Horcrux down,
mate!” Bolstered by the destruction of the locket, they set to
debating the possible locations of the other
Horcruxes, and even though they had discussed the
matter so often before, Harry felt optimistic, certain
that more breakthroughs would succeed the first.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling Hermione’s sulkiness could not mar his buoyant
spirits: The sudden upswing in their fortunes, the
appearance of the mysterious doe, the recovery of
Gryffindor’s sword, and above all, Ron’s return, made
Harry so happy that it was quite difficult to maintain
a straight face. Late in the afternoon he and Ron escaped Hermione’s
baleful presence again, and under the pretense of
scouring the bare hedges for nonexistent
blackberries, they continued their ongoing exchange
of news. Harry had finally managed to tell Ron the
whole story of his and Hermione’s various
wanderings, right up to the full story of what had
happened at Godric’s Hollow; Ron was now filling
Harry in on everything he had discovered about the
wider Wizarding world during his weeks away. "... and how did you find out about the Taboo?” he
asked Harry after explaining the many desperate
attempts of Muggle-borns to evade the Ministry. “The what?” “You and Hermione have stopped saying You-Know-
Who’s name!” “Oh, yeah. Well, it’s just a bad habit we’ve slipped
into,” said Harry. “But I haven’t got a problem calling
him V — ” “NO!” roared Ron, causing Harry to jump into the
hedge and Hermione (nose buried in a book at the
tent entrance) to scowl over at them. “Sorry,” said
Ron, wrenching Harry back out of the brambles, “but
the name’s been jinxed, Harry, that’s how they track
people! Using his name breaks protective
enchantments, it causes some kind of magical  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
disturbance — it’s how they found us in Tottenham
Court Road!” “Because we used his name?” “Exactly! You’ve got to give them credit, it makes
sense. It was only people who were serious about
standing up to him, like Dumbledore, who ever dared
use it. Now they’ve put a Taboo on it, anyone who
says it is trackable — quick-and-easy way to find
Order members! They nearly got Kingsley — ” “You’re kidding?” “Yeah, a bunch of Death Eaters cornered him, Bill
said, but he fought his way out. He’s on the run now,
just like us.” Ron scratched his chin thoughtfully with
the end of his wand. “You don’t reckon Kingsley could
have sent that doe?” “His Patronus is a lynx, we saw it at the wedding,
remember?” “Oh yeah ...” They moved farther along the hedge, away from the
tent and Hermione. “Harry ... you don’t reckon it could’ve been
Dumbledore?” “Dumbledore what?” Ron looked a little embarrassed, but said in a low
voice, “Dumbledore ... the doe? I mean,” Ron was
watching Harry out of the corners of his eyes, “he had
the real sword last, didn’t he?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Harry did not laugh at Ron, because he understood
too well the longing behind the question. The idea
that Dumbledore had managed to come back to them,
that he was watching over them, would have been
inexpressibly comforting. He shook his head. “Dumbledore’s dead,” he said. “I saw it happen, I saw
the body. He’s definitely gone. Anyway, his Patronus
was a phoenix, not a doe.” “Patronuses can change, though, can’t they?” said
Ron. “Tonks’s changed, didn’t it?” “Yeah, but if Dumbledore was alive, why wouldn’t he
show himself? Why wouldn’t he just hand us the
sword?” “Search me,” said Ron. “Same reason he didn’t give it
to you while he was alive? Same reason he left you an
old Snitch and Hermione a book of kids’ stories?” “Which is what?” asked Harry, turning to look Ron
full in the face, desperate for the answer. “I dunno,” said Ron. “Sometimes I’ve thought, when
I’ve been a bit hacked off, he was having a laugh or —
or he just wanted to make it more difficult. But I don’t
think so, not anymore. He knew what he was doing
when he gave me the Deluminator, didn’t he? He —
well,” Ron’s ears turned bright red and he became
engrossed in a tuft of grass at his feet, which he
prodded with his toe, “he must’ve known I’d run out
on you.” “No,” Harry corrected him. “He must’ve known you’d
always want to come back.” Ron looked grateful, but still awkward. Partly to
change the subject, Harry said, “Speaking of  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Dumbledore, have you heard what Skeeter wrote
about him?” “Oh yeah,” said Ron at once, “people are talking about
it quite a lot. ’Course, if things were different, it’d be
huge news, Dumbledore being pals with Grindelwald,
but now it’s just something to laugh about for people
who didn’t like Dumbledore, and a bit of a slap in the
face for everyone who thought he was such a good
bloke. I don’t know that it’s such a big deal, though.
He was really young when they — ” “Our age,” said Harry, just as he had retorted to
Hermione, and something in his face seemed to
decide Ron against pursuing the subject. A large spider sat in the middle of a frosted web in the
brambles. Harry took aim at it with the wand Ron had
given him the previous night, which Hermione had
since condescended to examine, and had decided was
made of blackthorn. “Engorgio.” The spider gave a little shiver, bouncing slightly in the
web. Harry tried again. This time the spider grew
slightly larger. “Stop that,” said Ron sharply. “I’m sorry I said
Dumbledore was young, okay?” Harry had forgotten Ron’s hatred of spiders. “Sorry — Reducio.” The spider did not shrink. Harry looked down at the
blackthorn wand. Every minor spell he had cast with
it so far that day had seemed less powerful than those
he had produced with his phoenix wand. The new one  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
felt intrusively unfamiliar, like having somebody else’s
hand sewn to the end of his arm. “You just need to practice,” said Hermione, who had
approached them noiselessly from behind and had
stood watching anxiously as Harry tried to enlarge
and reduce the spider. “It’s all a matter of confidence,
Harry.” He knew why she wanted it to be all right: She still
felt guilty about breaking his wand. He bit back the
retort that sprang to his lips, that she could take the
blackthorn wand if she thought it made no difference,
and he would have hers instead. Keen for them all to
be friends again, however, he agreed; but when Ron
gave Hermione a tentative smile, she stalked off and
vanished behind her book once more. All three of them returned to the tent when darkness
fell, and Harry took first watch. Sitting in the
entrance, he tried to make the blackthorn wand
levitate small stones at his feet; but his magic still
seemed clumsier and less powerful than it had done
before. Hermione was lying on her bunk reading,
while Ron, after many nervous glances up at her, had
taken a small wooden wireless out of his rucksack
and started to try and tune it. “There’s this one program,” he told Harry in a low
voice, “that tells the news like it really is. All the
others are on You- Know- Who’s side and are following
the Ministry line, but this one ... you wait till you
hear it, it’s great. Only they can’t do it every night,
they have to keep changing locations in case they’re
raided, and you need a password to tune in. ... Trouble is, I missed the last one. ...” He drummed lightly on the top of the radio with his
wand, muttering random words under his breath. He  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
threw Hermione many covert glances, plainly fearing
an angry outburst, but for all the notice she took of
him he might not have been there. For ten minutes or
so Ron tapped and muttered, Hermione turned the
pages of her book, and Harry continued to practice
with the blackthorn wand. Finally Hermione climbed down from her bunk. Ron
ceased his tapping at once. “If it’s annoying you,  stop!” he told Hermione
nervously. Hermione did not deign to respond, but approached
Harry. “We need to talk,” she said. He looked at the book still clutched in her hand. It
was The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore. “What?” he said apprehensively. It flew through his
mind that there was a chapter on him in there; he
was not sure he felt up to hearing Rita’s version of his
relationship with Dumbledore. Hermione ’s answer,
however, was completely unexpected. “I want to go and see Xenophilius Lovegood.” He stared at her. “Sorry?” “Xenophilius Lovegood. Luna’s father. I want to go
and talk to him!” “Er — why?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
She took a deep breath, as though bracing herself,
and said, “It’s that mark, the mark in Beedle the
Bard. Look at this!” She thrust The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledore
under Harry’s unwilling eyes and he saw a
photograph of the original letter that Dumbledore had
written Grindelwald, with Dumbledore ’s familiar thin,
slanting handwriting. He hated seeing absolute proof
that Dumbledore really had written those words, that
they had not been Rita’s invention. “The signature,” said Hermione. “Look at the
signature, Harry!” He obeyed. For a moment he had no idea what she
was talking about, but, looking more closely with the
aid of his lit wand, he saw that Dumbledore had
replaced the A of Albus with a tiny version of the
same triangular mark inscribed upon The Tales of
Beedle the Bard. “Er — what are you — ?” said Ron tentatively, but
Hermione quelled him with a look and turned back to
Harry. “It keeps cropping up, doesn’t it?” she said. “I know
Viktor said it was Grindelwald ’s mark, but it was
definitely on that old grave in Godric’s Hollow, and
the dates on the headstone were long before
Grindelwald came along! And now this! Well, we can’t
ask Dumbledore or Grindelwald what it means — I
don’t even know whether Grindelwald’s still alive —
but we can ask Mr. Lovegood. He was wearing the
symbol at the wedding. I’m sure this is important,
Harry!” Harry did not answer immediately. He looked into her
intense, eager face and then out into the surrounding  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
darkness, thinking. After a long pause he said,
“Hermione, we don’t need another Godric’s Hollow. We talked ourselves into going there, and — ” “But it keeps appearing, Harry! Dumbledore left me
The Tales of Beedle the Bard, how do you know we’re
not supposed to find out about the sign?” “Here we go again!” Harry felt slightly exasperated. “We keep trying to convince ourselves Dumbledore left
us secret signs and clues — ” “The Deluminator turned out to be pretty useful,”
piped up Ron. “I think Hermione’s right, I think we
ought to go and see Lovegood.” Harry threw him a dark look. He was quite sure that
Ron’s support of Hermione had little to do with a
desire to know the meaning of the triangular rune. “It won’t be like Godric’s Hollow,” Ron added,
“Lovegood’s on your side, Harry, The Quibbler’s been
for you all along, it keeps telling everyone they’ve got
to help you!” “I’m sure this is important!” said Hermione earnestly. “But don’t you think if it was, Dumbledore would
have told me about it before he died?” “Maybe ... maybe it’s something you need to find out
for yourself,” said Hermione with a faint air of
clutching at straws. “Yeah,” said Ron sycophantically, “that makes sense.” “No, it doesn’t,” snapped Hermione, “but I still think
we ought to talk to Mr. Lovegood. A symbol that links  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Dumbledore, Grindelwald, and Godric’s Hollow?
Harry, I’m sure we ought to know about this!” “I think we should vote on it,” said Ron. “Those in
favor of going to see Lovegood — ” His hand flew into the air before Hermione’s. Her lips
quivered suspiciously as she raised her own. “Outvoted, Harry, sorry,” said Ron, clapping him on
the back. “Fine,” said Harry, half amused, half irritated. “Only,
once we’ve seen Lovegood, let’s try and look for some
more Horcruxes, shall we? Where do the Lovegoods
live, anyway? Do either of you know?” “Yeah, they’re not far from my place,” said Ron. “I
dunno exactly where, but Mum and Dad always point
toward the hills whenever they mention them.
Shouldn’t be hard to find.” When Hermione had returned to her bunk, Harry
lowered his voice. “You only agreed to try and get back in her good
books.” “All’s fair in love and war,” said Ron brightly, “and
this is a bit of both. Cheer up, it’s the Christmas
holidays, Luna ’ll be home!” They had an excellent view of the village of Ottery St.
Catchpole from the breezy hillside to which they
Disapparated next morning. From their high vantage
point the village looked like a collection of toy houses
in the great slanting shafts of sunlight stretching to
earth in the breaks between clouds. They stood for a
minute or two looking toward the Burrow, their hands Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
shadowing their eyes, but all they could make out
were the high hedges and trees of the orchard, which
afforded the crooked little house protection from
Muggle eyes. “It’s weird, being this near, but not going to visit,”
said Ron. “Well, it’s not like you haven’t just seen them. You
were there for Christmas,” said Hermione coldly. “I wasn’t at the Burrow!” said Ron with an
incredulous laugh. “Do you think I was going to go
back there and tell them all I’d walked out on you?
Yeah, Fred and George would’ve been great about it.
And Ginny, she’d have been really understanding.” “But where have you been, then?” asked Hermione,
surprised. “Bill and Fleur’s new place. Shell Cottage. Bill’s
always been decent to me. He — he wasn’t impressed
when he heard what I’d done, but he didn’t go on
about it. He knew I was really sorry. None of the rest
of the family know I was there. Bill told Mum he and
Fleur weren’t going home for Christmas because they
wanted to spend it alone. You know, first holiday after
they were married. I don’t think Fleur minded. You
know how much she hates Celestina Warbeck.” Ron turned his back on the Burrow. “Let’s try up here,” he said, leading the way over the
top of the hill. They walked for a few hours, Harry, at Hermione ’s
insistence, hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak. The
cluster of low hills appeared to be uninhabited apart
from one small cottage, which seemed deserted.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“Do you think it’s theirs, and they’ve gone away for
Christmas?” said Hermione, peering through the
window at a neat little kitchen with geraniums on the
windowsill. Ron snorted. “Listen, I’ve got a feeling you’d be able to tell who lived
there if you looked through the Lovegoods’ window.
Let’s try the next lot of hills.” So they Disapparated a few miles farther north. “Aha!” shouted Ron, as the wind whipped their hair
and clothes. Ron was pointing upward, toward the top
of the hill on which they had appeared, where a most
strange-looking house rose vertically against the sky,
a great black cylinder with a ghostly moon hanging
behind it in the afternoon sky. “That’s got to be
Luna’s house, who else would live in a place like that?
It looks like a giant rook!” “It’s nothing like a bird,” said Hermione, frowning at
the tower. “I was talking about a chess rook,” said Ron. “A castle
to you.” Ron’s legs were the longest and he reached the top of
the hill first. When Harry and Hermione caught up
with him, panting and clutching stitches in their
sides, they found him grinning broadly. “It’s theirs,” said Ron. “Look.” Three hand-painted signs had been tacked to a
broken-down gate. The first read, THE QUIBBLER. EDITOR: X. LOVEGOOD the second,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
PICK YOUR OWN MISTLETOE the third, KEEP OFF THE DIRIGIBLE PLUMS The gate creaked as they opened it. The zigzagging
path leading to the front door was overgrown with a
variety of odd plants, including a bush covered in the
orange radishlike fruit Luna sometimes wore as
earrings. Harry thought he recognized a Snargaluff
and gave the wizened stump a wide berth. Two aged
crab apple trees, bent with the wind, stripped of
leaves but still heavy with berry-sized red fruits and
bushy crowns of white-beaded mistletoe, stood
sentinel on either side of the front door. A little owl
with a slightly flattened, hawklike head peered down
at them from one of the branches. “You’d better take off the Invisibility Cloak, Harry,”
said Hermione. “It’s you Mr. Lovegood wants to help,
not us.” He did as she suggested, handing her the Cloak to
stow in the beaded bag. She then rapped three times
on the thick black door, which was studded with iron
nails and bore a knocker shaped like an eagle. Barely ten seconds passed, then the door was flung
open and there stood Xenophilius Lovegood, barefoot
and wearing what appeared to be a stained nightshirt
His long white candyfloss hair was dirty and
unkempt. Xenophilius had been positively dapper at
Bill and Fleur’s wedding by comparison. “What? What is it? Who are you? What do you want?”
he cried in a high-pitched, querulous voice, looking
first at Hermione, then at Ron, and finally at Harry,  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
upon which his mouth fell open in a perfect, comical O. “Hello, Mr. Lovegood,” said Harry, holding out his
hand. “I’m Harry, Harry Potter.” Xenophilius did not take Harry’s hand, although the
eye that was not pointing inward at his nose slid
straight to the scar on Harry’s forehead. “Would it be okay if we came in?” asked Harry.
“There’s something we’d like to ask you.” “I ... I’m not sure that’s advisable,” whispered
Xenophilius. He swallowed and cast a quick look
around the garden. “Rather a shock ... My word ... I
... I’m afraid I don’t really think I ought to — ” “It won’t take long,” said Harry, slightly disappointed
by this less-than-warm welcome. “I — oh, all right then. Come in, quickly. QuicklyV’ They were barely over the threshold when Xenophilius
slammed the door shut behind them. They were
standing in the most peculiar kitchen Harry had ever
seen. The room was perfectly circular, so that it felt
like being inside a giant pepper pot. Everything was
curved to fit the walls — the stove, the sink, and the
cupboards — and all of it had been painted with
flowers, insects, and birds in bright primary colors.
Harry thought he recognized Luna’s style: The effect,
in such an enclosed space, was slightly
overwhelming. In the middle of the floor, a wrought-iron spiral
staircase led to the upper levels. There was a great
deal of clattering and banging coming from overhead:
Harry wondered what Luna could be doing.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“You’d better come up,” said Xenophilius, still looking
extremely uncomfortable, and he led the way. The room above seemed to be a combination of living
room and workplace, and as such, was even more
cluttered than the kitchen. Though much smaller and
entirely round, the room somewhat resembled the
Room of Requirement on the unforgettable occasion
that it had transformed itself into a gigantic labyrinth
comprised of centuries of hidden objects. There were
piles upon piles of books and papers on every surface.
Delicately made models of creatures Harry did not
recognize, all flapping wings or snapping jaws, hung
from the ceiling. Luna was not there: The thing that was making such
a racket was a wooden object covered in magically
turning cogs and wheels. It looked like the bizarre
offspring of a workbench and a set of old shelves, but
after a moment Harry deduced that it was an old-
fashioned printing press, due to the fact that it was
churning out Quibblers. “Excuse me,” said Xenophilius, and he strode over to
the machine, seized a grubby tablecloth from beneath
an immense number of books and papers, which all
tumbled onto the floor, and threw it over the press,
somewhat muffling the loud bangs and clatters. He
then faced Harry. “Why have you come here?” Before Harry could speak, however, Hermione let out
a small cry of shock. “Mr. Lovegood — what’s that?” She was pointing at an enormous, gray spiral horn,
not unlike that of a unicorn, which had been  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
mounted on the wall, protruding several feet into the
room. “It is the horn of a Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” said
Xenophilius. “No it isn’t!” said Hermione. “Hermione,” muttered Harry, embarrassed, “now’s not
the moment — ” “But Harry, it’s an Erumpent horn! It’s a Class B
Tradeable Material and it’s an extraordinarily
dangerous thing to have in a house!” “How d’you know it’s an Erumpent horn?” asked Ron,
edging away from the horn as fast as he could, given
the extreme clutter of the room. “There’s a description in Fantastic Beasts and Where
to Find Them .! Mr. Lovegood, you need to get rid of it
straightaway, don’t you know it can explode at the
slightest touch?” “The Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” said Xenophilius
very clearly, a mulish look upon his face, “is a shy
and highly magical creature, and its horn — ” “Mr. Lovegood, I recognize the grooved markings
around the base, that’s an Erumpent horn and it’s
incredibly dangerous — I don’t know where you got it “I bought it,” said Xenophilius dogmatically, “two
weeks ago, from a delightful young wizard who knew
of my interest in the exquisite Snorkack. A Christmas
surprise for my Luna. Now,” he said, turning to
Harry, “why exactly have you come here, Mr. Potter?”  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
“We need some help,” said Harry, before Hermione
could start again. “Ah,” said Xenophilius. “Help. Hmm.” His good eye moved again to Harry’s scar. He seemed
simultaneously terrified and mesmerized. “Yes. The thing is ... helping Harry Potter ... rather
dangerous ...” “Aren’t you the one who keeps telling everyone it’s
their first duty to help Harry?” said Ron.
It was nearing midnight and the Prime Minister was
sitting alone in his office, reading a long memo that
was slipping through his brain without leaving the
slightest trace of meaning behind. He was waiting for
a call from the President of a far distant country, and
between wondering when the wretched man would
telephone, and trying to suppress unpleasant
memories of what had been a very long, tiring, and
difficult week, there was not much space in his head
for anything else. The more he attempted to focus on
the print on the page before him, the more clearly the
Prime Minister could see the gloating face of one of
his political opponents. This particular opponent had
appeared on the news that very day, not only to
enumerate all the terrible things that had happened
in the last week (as though anyone needed reminding)
but also to explain why each and every one of them
was the government’s fault. The Prime Minister’s pulse quickened at the very
thought of these accusations, for they were neither
fair nor true. How on earth was his government supposed to have stopped that bridge collapsing? It
was outrageous for anybody to suggest that they were
not spending enough on bridges. The bridge was
fewer than ten years old, and the best experts were at
a loss to explain why it had snapped cleanly in two,
sending a dozen cars into the watery depths of the
river below. And how dare anyone suggest that it was
lack of policemen that had resulted in those two very
nasty and well-publicized murders? Or that the
government should have somehow foreseen the freak
hurricane in the West Country that had caused so
much damage to both people and property? And was
it his fault that one of his Junior Ministers, Herbert
Chorley, had chosen this week to act so peculiarly
that he was now going to be spending a lot more time
with his family? “A grim mood has gripped the country,” the opponent
had concluded, barely concealing his own broad grin. And unfortunately, this was perfectly true. The Prime
Minister felt it himself; people really did seem more
miserable than usual. Even the weather was dismal;
all this chilly mist in the middle of July. ... It wasn’t
right, it wasn’t normal. ... He turned over the second page of the memo, saw
how much longer it went on, and gave it up as a bad
job. Stretching his arms above his head he looked
around his office mournfully. It was a handsome
room, with a fine marble fireplace facing the long sash
windows, firmly closed against the unseasonable
chill. With a slight shiver, the Prime Minister got up
and moved over to the window, looking out at the thin
mist that was pressing itself against the glass. It was
then, as he stood with his back to the room, that he
heard a soft cough behind him.
He froze, nose to nose with his own scared-looking
reflection in the dark glass. He knew that cough. He
had heard it before. He turned very slowly to face the
empty room. “Hello?” he said, trying to sound braver than he felt. For a brief moment he allowed himself the impossible
hope that nobody would answer him. However, a
voice responded at once, a crisp, decisive voice that
sounded as though it were reading a prepared
statement. It was coming — as the Prime Minister
had known at the first cough — from the froglike little
man wearing a long silver wig who was depicted in a
small, dirty oil painting in the far corner of the room. “To the Prime Minister of Muggles. Urgent we meet.
Kindly respond immediately. Sincerely, Fudge.” The man in the painting looked inquiringly at the
Prime Minister. “Er,” said the Prime Minister, “listen. ... It’s not a very
good time for me. ... I’m waiting for a telephone call,
you see . . . from the President of — ” “That can be rearranged,” said the portrait at once.
The Prime Minister’s heart sank. He had been afraid
of that. “But I really was rather hoping to speak — ” “We shall arrange for the President to forget to call. He will telephone tomorrow night instead,” said the
little man. “Kindly respond immediately to Mr. Fudge.” “I ... oh ... very well,” said the Prime Minister weakly.
“Yes, I’ll see Fudge.”  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
He hurried back to his desk, straightening his tie as
he went. He had barely resumed his seat, and
arranged his face into what he hoped was a relaxed
and unfazed expression, when bright green flames
burst into life in the empty grate beneath his marble
mantelpiece. He watched, trying not to betray a flicker
of surprise or alarm, as a portly man appeared within
the flames, spinning as fast as a top. Seconds later,
he had climbed out onto a rather fine antique rug,
brushing ash from the sleeves of his long pin-striped
cloak, a lime-green bowler hat in his hand. “Ah ... Prime Minister,” said Cornelius Fudge, striding
forward with his hand outstretched. “Good to see you
again.” The Prime Minister could not honestly return this
compliment, so said nothing at all. He was not
remotely pleased to see Fudge, whose occasional
appearances, apart from being downright alarming in
themselves, generally meant that he was about to
hear some very bad news. Furthermore, Fudge was
looking distinctly careworn. He was thinner, balder,
and grayer, and his face had a crumpled look. The
Prime Minister had seen that kind of look in
politicians before, and it never boded well. “How can I help you?” he said, shaking Fudge’s hand
very briefly and gesturing toward the hardest of the
chairs in front of the desk. “Difficult to know where to begin,” muttered Fudge,
pulling up the chair, sitting down, and placing his
green bowler upon his knees. “What a week, what a
week ...” “Had a bad one too, have you?” asked the Prime
Minister stiffly, hoping to convey by this that he had
quite enough on his plate already without any extra
helpings from Fudge. “Yes, of course,” said Fudge, rubbing his eyes wearily
and looking morosely at the Prime Minister. “I’ve been
having the same week you have, Prime Minister. The
Brockdale Bridge ... the Bones and Vance murders ...
not to mention the ruckus in the West Country ...” “You — er — your — I mean to say, some of your
people were — were involved in those — those things,
were they?” Fudge fixed the Prime Minister with a rather stern
look. “Of course they were,” he said. “Surely you’ve
realized what’s going on?” “I ...” hesitated the Prime Minister. It was precisely this sort of behavior that made him
dislike Fudge’s visits so much. He was, after all, the
Prime Minister and did not appreciate being made to
feel like an ignorant schoolboy. But of course, it had
been like this from his very first meeting with Fudge
on his very first evening as Prime Minister. He
remembered it as though it were yesterday and knew
it would haunt him until his dying day. He had been standing alone in this very office,
savoring the triumph that was his after so many
years of dreaming and scheming, when he had heard
a cough behind him, just like tonight, and turned to
find that ugly little portrait talking to him,
announcing that the Minister of Magic was about to
arrive and introduce himself. Naturally, he had thought that the long campaign and
the strain of the election had caused him to go mad.
He had been utterly terrified to find a portrait talking  Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling
to him, though this had been nothing to how he felt
when a self-proclaimed wizard had bounced out of the
fireplace and shaken his hand. He had remained
speechless throughout Fudge’s kindly explanation
that there were witches and wizards still living in
secret all over the world and his reassurances that he
was not to bother his head about them as the
Ministry of Magic took responsibility for the whole
Wizarding community and prevented the non-magical
population from getting wind of them. It was, said
Fudge, a difficult job that encompassed everything
from regulations on responsible use of broomsticks to
keeping the dragon population under control (the
Prime Minister remembered clutching the desk for
support at this point). Fudge had then patted the
shoulder of the still-dumbstruck Prime Minister in a
fatherly sort of way. “Not to worry,” he had said, “it’s odds-on you’ll never
see me again. I’ll only bother you if there’s something
really serious going on our end, something that’s
likely to affect the Muggles — the non-magical
population, I should say. Otherwise, it’s live and let
live. And I must say, you’re taking it a lot better than
your predecessor. He tried to throw me out the
window, thought I was a hoax planned by the
opposition.” At this, the Prime Minister had found his voice at last.
“You’re — you’re not a hoax, then?” It had been his last, desperate hope. “No,” said Fudge gently. “No, I’m afraid I’m not. Look.” And he had turned the Prime Minister’s teacup into a
gerbil.
“But,” said the Prime Minister breathlessly, watching
his teacup chewing on the corner of his next speech,
“but why — why has nobody told me — ?” “The Minister of Magic only reveals him- or herself to
the Muggle Prime Minister of the day,” said Fudge,
poking his wand back inside his jacket. “We find it
the best way to maintain secrecy.” “But then,” bleated the Prime Minister, “why hasn’t a
former Prime Minister warned me — ?” At this, Fudge had actually laughed. “My dear Prime Minister, are you ever going to tell
anybody?” Still chortling, Fudge had thrown some powder into
the fireplace, stepped into the emerald flames, and
vanished with a whooshing sound. The Prime
Minister had stood there, quite motionless, and
realized that he would never, as long as he lived, dare
mention this encounter to a living soul, for who in the
wide world would believe him? The shock had taken a little while to wear off. For a
time, he had tried to convince himself that Fudge had
indeed been a hallucination brought on by lack of
sleep during his grueling election campaign. In a vain
attempt to rid himself of all reminders of this
uncomfortable encounter, he had given the gerbil to
his delighted niece and instructed his private
secretary to take down the portrait of the ugly little
man who had announced Fudge’s arrival. To the
Prime Minister’s dismay, however, the portrait had
proved impossible to remove. When several
carpenters, a builder or two, an art historian, and the
Chancellor of the Exchequer had all tried
unsuccessfully to prise it from the wall, the Prime
Minister had abandoned the attempt and simply
resolved to hope that the thing remained motionless
and silent for the rest of his term in office.
Occasionally he could have sworn he saw out of the
corner of his eye the occupant of the painting
yawning, or else scratching his nose; even, once or
twice, simply walking out of his frame and leaving
nothing but a stretch of muddy-brown canvas behind.
However, he had trained himself not to look at the
picture very much, and always to tell himself firmly
that his eyes were playing tricks on him when
anything like this happened. Then, three years ago, on a night very like tonight, the
Prime Minister had been alone in his office when the
portrait had once again announced the imminent
arrival of Fudge, who had burst out of the fireplace,
sopping wet and in a state of considerable panic.
Before the Prime Minister could ask why he was
dripping all over the Axminster, Fudge had started
ranting about a prison the Prime Minister had never
heard of, a man named “Serious” Black, something
that sounded like “Hogwarts,” and a boy called Harry
Potter, none of which made the remotest sense to the
Prime Minister. "... Fve just come from Azkaban,” Fudge had panted,
tipping a large amount of water out of the rim of his
bowler hat into his pocket. “Middle of the North Sea,
you know, nasty flight . . . the dementors are in
uproar” — he shuddered — “they’ve never had a
breakout before. Anyway, I had to come to you, Prime
Minister. Black’s a known Muggle killer and may be
planning to rejoin You-Know-Who. ... But of course,
you don’t even know who You-Know-Who is!” He had
gazed hopelessly at the Prime Minister for a moment,
then said, “Well, sit down, sit down, I’d better fill you
in. ... Have a whiskey ...”
The Prime Minister rather resented being told to sit
down in his own office, let alone offered his own
whiskey, but he sat nevertheless. Fudge pulled out
his wand, conjured two large glasses full of amber
liquid out of thin air, pushed one of them into the
Prime Minister’s hand, and drew up a chair. Fudge had talked for more than an hour. At one
point, he had refused to say a certain name aloud and
wrote it instead on a piece of parchment, which he
had thrust into the Prime Minister’s whiskey-free
hand. When at last Fudge had stood up to leave, the
Prime Minister had stood up too. “So you think that ...” He had squinted down at the
name in his left hand. “Lord Vol — ” “ He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\” snarled Fudge. “I’m sorry. ... You think that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-
Named is still alive, then?” “Well, Dumbledore says he is,” said Fudge, as he had
fastened his pin-striped cloak under his chin, “but
we’ve never found him. If you ask me, he’s not
dangerous unless he’s got support, so it’s Black we
ought to be worrying about. You’ll put out that
warning, then? Excellent. Well, I hope we don’t see
each other again, Prime Minister! Good night.” But they had seen each other again. Less than a year
later a harassed-looking Fudge had appeared out of
thin air in the cabinet room to inform the Prime
Minister that there had been a spot of bother at the
Kwidditch (or that was what it had sounded like)
World Cup and that several Muggles had been
“involved,” but that the Prime Minister was not to
worry, the fact that You-Know- Who’s Mark had been
seen again meant nothing; Fudge was sure it was an
isolated incident, and the Muggle Liaison Office was
dealing with all memory modifications as they spoke. “Oh, and I almost forgot,” Fudge had added. “We’re
importing three foreign dragons and a sphinx for the
Triwizard Tournament, quite routine, but the
Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical
Creatures tells me that it’s down in the rule book that
we have to notify you if we’re bringing highly
dangerous creatures into the country.” “I — what — dragons?” spluttered the Prime Minister. “Yes, three,” said Fudge. “And a sphinx. Well, good
day to you.” The Prime Minister had hoped beyond hope that
dragons and sphinxes would be the worst of it, but
no. Less than two years later, Fudge had erupted out
of the fire yet again, this time with the news that
there had been a mass breakout from Azkaban. “A mass breakout?” repeated the Prime Minister
hoarsely. “No need to worry, no need to worry!” shouted Fudge,
already with one foot in the flames. “We’ll have them
rounded up in no time — just thought you ought to
know!” And before the Prime Minister could shout, “Now, wait
just one moment!” Fudge had vanished in a shower of
green sparks. Whatever the press and the opposition might say, the
Prime Minister was not a foolish man. It had not
escaped his notice that, despite Fudge’s assurances
at their first meeting, they were now seeing rather a
lot of each other, nor that Fudge was becoming more
flustered with each visit. Little though he liked to
think about the Minister of Magic (or, as he always
called Fudge in his head, the Other Minister), the
Prime Minister could not help but fear that the next
time Fudge appeared it would be with graver news
still. The sight, therefore, of Fudge stepping out of the
fire once more, looking disheveled and fretful and
sternly surprised that the Prime Minister did not
know exactly why he was there, was about the worst
thing that had happened in the course of this
extremely gloomy week. “How should I know what’s going on in the — er —
Wizarding community?” snapped the Prime Minister
now. “I have a country to run and quite enough
concerns at the moment without — ” “We have the same concerns,” Fudge interrupted. “The Brockdale Bridge didn’t wear out. That wasn’t
really a hurricane. Those murders were not the work
of Muggles. And Herbert Chorley’s family would be
safer without him. We are currently making
arrangements to have him transferred to St. Mungo’s
Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries. The move
should be effected tonight.” “What do you ... I’m afraid I ... What?” blustered the
Prime Minister. Fudge took a great, deep breath and said, “Prime
Minister, I am very sorry to have to tell you that he’s
back. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back.” “Back? When you say ‘back’ ... he’s alive? I mean — ” The Prime Minister groped in his memory for the
details of that horrible conversation of three years
previously, when Fudge had told him about the
wizard who was feared above all others, the wizard
who had committed a thousand terrible crimes before
his mysterious disappearance fifteen years earlier. “Yes, alive,” said Fudge. “That is — I don’t know — is
a man alive if he can’t be killed? I don’t really
understand it, and Dumbledore won’t explain
properly — but anyway, he’s certainly got a body and
is walking and talking and killing, so I suppose, for
the purposes of our discussion, yes, he’s alive.” The Prime Minister did not know what to say to this,
but a persistent habit of wishing to appear well-
informed on any subject that came up made him cast
around for any details he could remember of their
previous conversations. “Is Serious Black with — er — He-Who-Must-Not-Be-
Named?” “Black? Black?” said Fudge distractedly, turning his
bowler rapidly in his fingers. “Sirius Black, you
mean? Merlin’s beard, no. Black’s dead. Turns out we
were — er — mistaken about Black. He was innocent
after all. And he wasn’t in league with He-Who-Must-
Not-Be-Named either. I mean,” he added defensively,
spinning the bowler hat still faster, “all the evidence
pointed — we had more than fifty eyewitnesses — but
anyway, as I say, he’s dead. Murdered, as a matter of
fact. On Ministry of Magic premises. There’s going to
be an inquiry, actually. ...” To his great surprise, the Prime Minister felt a fleeting
stab of pity for Fudge at this point. It was, however,
eclipsed almost immediately by a glow of smugness at
the thought that, deficient though he himself might
be in the area of materializing out of fireplaces, there
had never been a murder in any of the government
departments under his charge. ... Not yet, anyway ...
While the Prime Minister surreptitiously touched the
wood of his desk, Fudge continued, “But Black’s by-
the-by now. The point is, we’re at war, Prime Minister,
and steps must be taken.” “At war?” repeated the Prime Minister nervously.
“Surely that’s a little bit of an overstatement?” “He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named has now been joined by
those of his followers who broke out of Azkaban in
January,” said Fudge, speaking more and more
rapidly and twirling his bowler so fast that it was a
lime-green blur. “Since they have moved into the
open, they have been wreaking havoc. The Brockdale
Bridge — he did it, Prime Minister, he threatened a
mass Muggle killing unless I stood aside for him and “Good grief, so it’s your fault those people were killed
and I’m having to answer questions about rusted
rigging and corroded expansion joints and I don’t
know what else!” said the Prime Minister furiously. “My fault!” said Fudge, coloring up. “Are you saying
you would have caved in to blackmail like that?” “Maybe not,” said the Prime Minister, standing up
and striding about the room, “but I would have put all
my efforts into catching the blackmailer before he
committed any such atrocity!” “Do you really think I wasn’t already making every
effort?” demanded Fudge heatedly. “Every Auror in
the Ministry was — and is — trying to find him and
round up his followers, but we happen to be talking
about one of the most powerful wizards of all time, a
wizard who has eluded capture for almost three
decades!”
“So I suppose you’re going to tell me he caused the
hurricane in the West Country too?” said the Prime
Minister, his temper rising with every pace he took. It
was infuriating to discover the reason for all these
terrible disasters and not to be able to tell the public,
almost worse than it being the government’s fault
after all. “That was no hurricane,” said Fudge miserably. “Excuse me!” barked the Prime Minister, now
positively stamping up and down. “Trees uprooted,
roofs ripped off, lampposts bent, horrible injuries — ” “It was the Death Eaters,” said Fudge. “He-Who-Must-
Not-Be-Named’s followers. And ... and we suspect
giant involvement.” The Prime Minister stopped in his tracks as though
he had hit an invisible wall. “ What involvement?” Fudge grimaced. “He used giants last time, when he
wanted to go for the grand effect,” he said. “The Office
of Misinformation has been working around the clock,
we’ve had teams of Obliviators out trying to modify
the memories of all the Muggles who saw what really
happened, we’ve got most of the Department for the
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures running
around Somerset, but we can’t find the giant — it’s
been a disaster.” “You don’t say!” said the Prime Minister furiously. “I won’t deny that morale is pretty low at the
Ministry,” said Fudge. “What with all that, and then
losing Amelia Bones.” “Losing who?”
“Amelia Bones. Head of the Department of Magical
Law Enforcement. We think He-Who-Must-Not-Be-
Named may have murdered her in person, because
she was a very gifted witch and — and all the
evidence was that she put up a real fight.” Fudge cleared his throat and, with an effort, it
seemed, stopped spinning his bowler hat. “But that murder was in the newspapers,” said the
Prime Minister, momentarily diverted from his anger.
“Our newspapers. Amelia Bones ... it just said she
was a middle-aged woman who lived alone. It was a —
a nasty killing, wasn’t it? It’s had rather a lot of
publicity. The police are baffled, you see.” Fudge sighed. “Well, of course they are,” he said.
“Killed in a room that was locked from the inside,
wasn’t she? We, on the other hand, know exactly who
did it, not that that gets us any further toward
catching him. And then there was Emmeline Vance,
maybe you didn’t hear about that one — ” “Oh yes I did!” said the Prime Minister. “It happened
just around the corner from here, as a matter of fact.
The papers had a field day with it, ‘breakdown of law
and order in the Prime Minister’s backyard — ’ ” “And as if all that wasn’t enough,” said Fudge, barely
listening to the Prime Minister, “we’ve got dementors
swarming all over the place, attacking people left,
right, and center. ...” Once upon a happier time this sentence would have
been unintelligible to the Prime Minister, but he was
wiser now. “I thought dementors guard the prisoners in
Azkaban,” he said cautiously.
“They did,” said Fudge wearily. “But not anymore.
They’ve deserted the prison and joined He-Who-Must-
Not-Be-Named. I won’t pretend that wasn’t a blow.” “But,” said the Prime Minister, with a sense of
dawning horror, “didn’t you tell me they’re the
creatures that drain hope and happiness out of
people?” “That’s right. And they’re breeding. That’s what’s
causing all this mist.” The Prime Minister sank, weak-kneed, into the
nearest chair. The idea of invisible creatures swooping
through the towns and countryside, spreading
despair and hopelessness in his voters, made him feel
quite faint. “Now see here, Fudge — you’ve got to do something!
It’s your responsibility as Minister of Magic!” “My dear Prime Minister, you can’t honestly think I’m
still Minister of Magic after all this? I was sacked
three days ago! The whole Wizarding community has
been screaming for my resignation for a fortnight. I’ve
never known them so united in my whole term of
office!” said Fudge, with a brave attempt at a smile. The Prime Minister was momentarily lost for words.
Despite his indignation at the position into which he
had been placed, he still rather felt for the shrunken-
looking man sitting opposite him. “I’m very sorry,” he said finally. “If there’s anything I
can do?” “It’s very kind of you, Prime Minister, but there is
nothing. I was sent here tonight to bring you up to
date on recent events and to introduce you to my
successor. I rather thought he’d be here by now, but
of course, he’s very busy at the moment, with so
much going on.” Fudge looked around at the portrait of the ugly little
man wearing the long curly silver wig, who was
digging in his ear with the point of a quill. Catching
Fudge’s eye, the portrait said, “He’ll be here in a
moment, he’s just finishing a letter to Dumbledore.” “I wish him luck,” said Fudge, sounding bitter for the
first time. “I’ve been writing to Dumbledore twice a
day for the past fortnight, but he won’t budge. If he’d
just been prepared to persuade the boy, I might still
be ... Well, maybe Scrimgeour will have more
success.” Fudge subsided into what was clearly an aggrieved
silence, but it was broken almost immediately by the
portrait, which suddenly spoke in its crisp, official
voice. “To the Prime Minister of Muggles. Requesting a
meeting. Urgent. Kindly respond immediately. Rufus
Scrimgeour, Minister of Magic.” “Yes, yes, fine,” said the Prime Minister distractedly,
and he barely flinched as the flames in the grate
turned emerald green again, rose up, and revealed a
second spinning wizard in their heart, disgorging him
moments later onto the antique rug. Fudge got to his feet and, after a moment’s hesitation,
the Prime Minister did the same, watching the new
arrival straighten up, dust down his long black robes,
and look around. The Prime Minister’s first, foolish thought was that
Rufus Scrimgeour looked rather like an old lion.
There were streaks of gray in his mane of tawny hair
and his bushy eyebrows; he had keen yellowish eyes
behind a pair of wire-rimmed spectacles and a certain
rangy, loping grace even though he walked with a
slight limp. There was an immediate impression of
shrewdness and toughness; the Prime Minister
thought he understood why the Wizarding community
preferred Scrimgeour to Fudge as a leader in these
dangerous times. “How do you do?” said the Prime Minister politely,
holding out his hand. Scrimgeour grasped it briefly, his eyes scanning the
room, then pulled out a wand from under his robes. “Fudge told you everything?” he asked, striding over
to the door and tapping the keyhole with his wand.
The Prime Minister heard the lock click. “Er — yes,” said the Prime Minister. “And if you don’t
mind, I’d rather that door remained unlocked.” “I’d rather not be interrupted,” said Scrimgeour
shortly, “or watched,” he added, pointing his wand at
the windows, so that the curtains swept across them.
“Right, well, I’m a busy man, so let’s get down to
business. First of all, we need to discuss your
security.” The Prime Minister drew himself up to his fullest
height and replied, “I am perfectly happy with the
security I’ve already got, thank you very — ” “Well, we’re not,” Scrimgeour cut in. “It’ll be a poor
lookout for the Muggles if their Prime Minister gets
put under the Imperius Curse. The new secretary in
your outer office — ”
‘Tm not getting rid of Kingsley Shacklebolt, if that’s
what you’re suggesting!” said the Prime Minister
hotly. “He’s highly efficient, gets through twice the
work the rest of them — ” “That’s because he’s a wizard,” said Scrimgeour,
without a flicker of a smile. “A highly trained Auror,
who has been assigned to you for your protection.” “Now, wait a moment!” declared the Prime Minister.
“You can’t just put your people into my office, I decide
who works for me — ” “I thought you were happy with Shacklebolt?” said
Scrimgeour coldly. “I am — that’s to say, I was — ” “Then there’s no problem, is there?” said Scrimgeour. “I ... well, as long as Shacklebolt’s work continues to
be ... er ... excellent,” said the Prime Minister lamely,
but Scrimgeour barely seemed to hear him. “Now, about Herbert Chorley, your Junior Minister,”
he continued. “The one who has been entertaining the
public by impersonating a duck.” “What about him?” asked the Prime Minister. “He has clearly reacted to a poorly performed
Imperius Curse,” said Scrimgeour. “It’s addled his
brains, but he could still be dangerous.” “He’s only quacking!” said the Prime Minister weakly.
“Surely a bit of a rest . . . Maybe go easy on the drink
“A team of Healers from St. Mungo’s Hospital for
Magical Maladies and Injuries are examining him as
we speak. So far he has attempted to strangle three of
them,” said Scrimgeour. “I think it best that we
remove him from Muggle society for a while.” “I ... well ... He’ll be all right, won’t he?” said the
Prime Minister anxiously. Scrimgeour merely shrugged, already moving back
toward the fireplace. “Well, that’s really all I had to say. I will keep you
posted of developments, Prime Minister — or, at least,
I shall probably be too busy to come personally, in
which case I shall send Fudge here. He has consented
to stay on in an advisory capacity.” Fudge attempted to smile, but was unsuccessful; he
merely looked as though he had a toothache.
Scrimgeour was already rummaging in his pocket for
the mysterious powder that turned the fire green. The
Prime Minister gazed hopelessly at the pair of them
for a moment, then the words he had fought to
suppress all evening burst from him at last. “But for heaven’s sake — you’re wizards'. You can do
magic ! Surely you can sort out — well — anything !” Scrimgeour turned slowly on the spot and exchanged
an incredulous look with Fudge, who really did
manage a smile this time as he said kindly, “The
trouble is, the other side can do magic too, Prime
Minister.” And with that, the two wizards stepped one after the
other into the bright green fire and vanished.  SPINNER’S END Many miles away the chilly mist that had pressed
against the Prime Minister’s windows drifted over a
dirty river that wound between overgrown, rubbish-
strewn banks. An immense chimney, relic of a
disused mill, reared up, shadowy and ominous. There
was no sound apart from the whisper of the black
water and no sign of life apart from a scrawny fox that
had slunk down the bank to nose hopefully at some
old fish-and-chip wrappings in the tall grass. But then, with a very faint pop, a slim, hooded figure
appeared out of thin air on the edge of the river. The
fox froze, wary eyes fixed upon this strange new
phenomenon. The figure seemed to take its bearings
for a few moments, then set off with light, quick
strides, its long cloak rustling over the grass. With a second and louder pop, another hooded figure
materialized. “Wait!”  The harsh cry startled the fox, now crouching almost
flat in the undergrowth. It leapt from its hiding place
and up the bank. There was a flash of green light, a
yelp, and the fox fell back to the ground, dead. The second figure turned over the animal with its toe. “Just a fox,” said a woman’s voice dismissively from
under the hood. “I thought perhaps an Auror — Cissy, wait!” But her quarry, who had paused and looked back at
the flash of light, was already scrambling up the bank
the fox had just fallen down. “Cissy — Narcissa — listen to me — ” The second woman caught the first and seized her
arm, but the other wrenched it away. “Go back, Bella!” “You must listen to me!” “I’ve listened already. I’ve made my decision. Leave me
alone!” The woman named Narcissa gained the top of the
bank, where a line of old railings separated the river
from a narrow, cobbled street. The other woman, Bella, followed at once. Side by side they stood
looking across the road at the rows and rows of
dilapidated brick houses, their windows dull and
blind in the darkness. “He lives here?” asked Bella in a voice of contempt.
“Here? In this Muggle dunghill? We must be the first
of our kind ever to set foot — ”
But Narcissa was not listening; she had slipped
through a gap in the rusty railings and was already
hurrying across the road. “Cissy, wait\” Bella followed, her cloak streaming behind, and saw
Narcissa darting through an alley between the houses
into a second, almost identical street. Some of the
streetlamps were broken; the two women were
running between patches of light and deep darkness.
The pursuer caught up with her prey just as she
turned another corner, this time succeeding in
catching hold of her arm and swinging her around so
that they faced each other. “Cissy, you must not do this, you can’t trust him — ” “The Dark Lord trusts him, doesn’t he?” “The Dark Lord is ... I believe ... mistaken,” Bella
panted, and her eyes gleamed momentarily under her
hood as she looked around to check that they were
indeed alone. “In any case, we were told not to speak
of the plan to anyone. This is a betrayal of the Dark
Lord’s — ” “Let go, Bella!” snarled Narcissa, and she drew a
wand from beneath her cloak, holding it threateningly
in the other’s face. Bella merely laughed. “Cissy, your own sister? You wouldn’t — ” “There is nothing I wouldn’t do anymore!” Narcissa
breathed, a note of hysteria in her voice, and as she
brought down the wand like a knife, there was
another flash of light. Bella let go of her sister’s arm
as though burned.
“Narcisscd” But Narcissa had rushed ahead. Rubbing her hand,
her pursuer followed again, keeping her distance now,
as they moved deeper into the deserted labyrinth of
brick houses. At last, Narcissa hurried up a street
named Spinner’s End, over which the towering mill
chimney seemed to hover like a giant admonitory
finger. Her footsteps echoed on the cobbles as she
passed boarded and broken windows, until she
reached the very last house, where a dim light
glimmered through the curtains in a downstairs
room. She had knocked on the door before Bella, cursing
under her breath, had caught up. Together they stood
waiting, panting slightly, breathing in the smell of the
dirty river that was carried to them on the night
breeze. After a few seconds, they heard movement
behind the door and it opened a crack. A sliver of a
man could be seen looking out at them, a man with
long black hair parted in curtains around a sallow
face and black eyes. Narcissa threw back her hood. She was so pale that
she seemed to shine in the darkness; the long blonde
hair streaming down her back gave her the look of a
drowned person. “Narcissa!” said the man, opening the door a little
wider, so that the light fell upon her and her sister
too. “What a pleasant surprise!” “Severus,” she said in a strained whisper. “May I
speak to you? It’s urgent.” “But of course.”
He stood back to allow her to pass him into the
house. Her still-hooded sister followed without
invitation. “Snape,” she said curtly as she passed him. “Bellatrix,” he replied, his thin mouth curling into a
slightly mocking smile as he closed the door with a
snap behind them. They had stepped directly into a tiny sitting room,
which had the feeling of a dark, padded cell. The walls
were completely covered in books, most of them
bound in old black or brown leather; a threadbare
sofa, an old armchair, and a rickety table stood
grouped together in a pool of dim light cast by a
candle-filled lamp hung from the ceiling. The place
had an air of neglect, as though it was not usually
inhabited. Snape gestured Narcissa to the sofa. She threw off
her cloak, cast it aside, and sat down, staring at her
white and trembling hands clasped in her lap. Bellatrix lowered her hood more slowly. Dark as her
sister was fair, with heavily lidded eyes and a strong
jaw, she did not take her gaze from Snape as she
moved to stand behind Narcissa. “So, what can I do for you?” Snape asked, settling
himself in the armchair opposite the two sisters. “We ... we are alone, aren’t we?” Narcissa asked
quietly. “Yes, of course. Well, Wormtail’s here, but we’re not
counting vermin, are we?” He pointed his wand at the wall of books behind him
and with a bang, a hidden door flew open, revealing a
narrow staircase upon which a small man stood
frozen. “As you have clearly realized, Wormtail, we have
guests,” said Snape lazily. The man crept, hunchbacked, down the last few steps
and moved into the room. He had small, watery eyes,
a pointed nose, and wore an unpleasant simper. His
left hand was caressing his right, which looked as
though it was encased in a bright silver glove. “Narcissa!” he said, in a squeaky voice. “And Bellatrix!
How charming — ” “Wormtail will get us drinks, if you’d like them,” said
Snape. “And then he will return to his bedroom.” Wormtail winced as though Snape had thrown
something at him. “I am not your servant!” he squeaked, avoiding
Snape ’s eye. “Really? I was under the impression that the Dark
Lord placed you here to assist me.” “To assist, yes — but not to make you drinks and —
and clean your house!” “I had no idea, Wormtail, that you were craving more
dangerous assignments,” said Snape silkily. “This can
be easily arranged: I shall speak to the Dark Lord — ” “I can speak to him myself if I want to!” “Of course you can,” said Snape, sneering. “But in the
meantime, bring us drinks. Some of the elf-made wine
will do.”
Wormtail hesitated for a moment, looking as though
he might argue, but then turned and headed through
a second hidden door. They heard banging and a
clinking of glasses. Within seconds he was back,
bearing a dusty bottle and three glasses upon a tray.
He dropped these on the rickety table and scurried
from their presence, slamming the book-covered door
behind him. Snape poured out three glasses of bloodred wine and
handed two of them to the sisters. Narcissa
murmured a word of thanks, whilst Bellatrix said
nothing, but continued to glower at Snape. This did
not seem to discompose him; on the contrary, he
looked rather amused. “The Dark Lord,” he said, raising his glass and
draining it. The sisters copied him. Snape refilled their glasses. As Narcissa took her second drink she said in a rush,
“Severus, I’m sorry to come here like this, but I had to
see you. I think you are the only one who can help me Snape held up a hand to stop her, then pointed his
wand again at the concealed staircase door. There
was a loud bang and a squeal, followed by the sound
of Wormtail scurrying back up the stairs. “My apologies,” said Snape. “He has lately taken to
listening at doors, I don’t know what he means by it. ... You were saying, Narcissa?” She took a great, shuddering breath and started
again. “Severus, I know I ought not to be here, I have been
told to say nothing to anyone, but — ”
“Then you ought to hold your tongue!” snarled
Bellatrix. “Particularly in present company!” “ ‘Present company’?” repeated Snape sardonically.
“And what am I to understand by that, Bellatrix?” “That I don’t trust you, Snape, as you very well
know!” Narcissa let out a noise that might have been a dry
sob and covered her face with her hands. Snape set
his glass down upon the table and sat back again, his
hands upon the arms of his chair, smiling into
Bellatrix’s glowering face. “Narcissa, I think we ought to hear what Bellatrix is
bursting to say; it will save tedious interruptions. Well, continue, Bellatrix,” said Snape. “Why is it that
you do not trust me?” “A hundred reasons!” she said loudly, striding out
from behind the sofa to slam her glass upon the table.
“Where to start! Where were you when the Dark Lord
fell? Why did you never make any attempt to find him
when he vanished? What have you been doing all
these years that you’ve lived in Dumbledore’s pocket?
Why did you stop the Dark Lord procuring the
Sorcerer’s Stone? Why did you not return at once
when the Dark Lord was reborn? Where were you a
few weeks ago when we battled to retrieve the
prophecy for the Dark Lord? And why, Snape, is
Harry Potter still alive, when you have had him at
your mercy for five years?” She paused, her chest rising and falling rapidly, the
color high in her cheeks. Behind her, Narcissa sat
motionless, her face still hidden in her hands. Snape smiled.
“Before I answer you — oh yes, Bellatrix, I am going
to answer! You can carry my words back to the others
who whisper behind my back, and carry false tales of
my treachery to the Dark Lord! Before I answer you, I
say, let me ask a question in turn. Do you really think
that the Dark Lord has not asked me each and every
one of those questions? And do you really think that,
had I not been able to give satisfactory answers, I
would be sitting here talking to you?” She hesitated. “I know he believes you, but ...” “You think he is mistaken? Or that I have somehow
hoodwinked him? Fooled the Dark Lord, the greatest
wizard, the most accomplished Legilimens the world
has ever seen?” Bellatrix said nothing, but looked, for the first time, a
little discomfited. Snape did not press the point. He
picked up his drink again, sipped it, and continued,
“You ask where I was when the Dark Lord fell. I was
where he had ordered me to be, at Hogwarts School of
Witchcraft and Wizardry, because he wished me to
spy upon Albus Dumbledore. You know, I presume,
that it was on the Dark Lord’s orders that I took up
the post?” She nodded almost imperceptibly and then opened
her mouth, but Snape forestalled her. “You ask why I did not attempt to find him when he
vanished. For the same reason that Avery, Yaxley, the
Carrows, Greyback, Lucius” — he inclined his head
slightly to Narcissa — “and many others did not
attempt to find him. I believed him finished. I am not
proud of it, I was wrong, but there it is. ... If he had
not forgiven we who lost faith at that time, he would
have very few followers left.” “He’d have me!” said Bellatrix passionately. “I, who
spent many years in Azkaban for him!” “Yes, indeed, most admirable,” said Snape in a bored
voice. “Of course, you weren’t a lot of use to him in
prison, but the gesture was undoubtedly fine — ” “Gesture!” she shrieked; in her fury she looked
slightly mad. “While I endured the dementors, you
remained at Hogwarts, comfortably playing
Dumbledore’s pet!” “Not quite,” said Snape calmly. “He wouldn’t give me
the Defense Against the Dark Arts job, you know.
Seemed to think it might, ah, bring about a relapse . . .
tempt me into my old ways.” “This was your sacrifice for the Dark Lord, not to
teach your favorite subject?” she jeered. “Why did you
stay there all that time, Snape? Still spying on
Dumbledore for a master you believed dead?” “Hardly,” said Snape, “although the Dark Lord is
pleased that I never deserted my post: I had sixteen
years of information on Dumbledore to give him when
he returned, a rather more useful welcome-back
present than endless reminiscences of how
unpleasant Azkaban is. ...” “But you stayed — ” “Yes, Bellatrix, I stayed,” said Snape, betraying a hint
of impatience for the first time. “I had a comfortable
job that I preferred to a stint in Azkaban. They were
rounding up the Death Eaters, you know.
Dumbledore’s protection kept me out of jail; it was
snapped Ron, who did not seem to have taken kindly
to being ignored by Slughorn. After dinner they made their way back to Gryffindor
Tower. The common room was very crowded, as most
people had finished dinner by now, but they managed
to find a free table and sat down; Ron, who had been
in a bad mood ever since the encounter with
Slughorn, folded his arms and frowned at the ceiling.
Hermione reached out for a copy of the Evening
Prophet, which somebody had left abandoned on a
chair. “Anything new?” said Harry. “Not really ...” Hermione had opened the newspaper
and was scanning the inside pages. “Oh, look, your
dad’s in here, Ron — he’s all right!” she added
quickly, for Ron had looked around in alarm. “It just
says he’s been to visit the Malfoys’ house. ‘This
second search of the Death Eater’s residence does not
seem to have yielded any results. Arthur Weasley of
the Office for the Detection and Confiscation of
Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects
said that his team had been acting upon a confidential
tip-off’” “Yeah, mine!” said Harry. “I told him at King’s Cross
about Malfoy and that thing he was trying to get
Borgin to fix! Well, if it’s not at their house, he must
have brought whatever it is to Hogwarts with him — ” “But how can he have done, Harry?” said Hermione,
putting down the newspaper with a surprised look.
“We were all searched when we arrived, weren’t we?” “Were you?” said Harry, taken aback. “I wasn’t!” “Oh no, of course you weren’t, I forgot you were late. ... Well, Filch ran over all of us with Secrecy Sensors
when we got into the entrance hall. Any Dark object
would have been found, I know for a fact Crabbe had
a shrunken head confiscated. So you see, Malfoy can’t
have brought in anything dangerous!” Momentarily stymied, Harry watched Ginny Weasley
playing with Arnold the Pygmy Puff for a while before
seeing a way around this objection.
“Someone’s sent it to him by owl, then,” he said. “His
mother or someone.” “All the owls are being checked too,” said Hermione.
“Filch told us so when he was jabbing those Secrecy
Sensors everywhere he could reach.” Really stumped this time, Harry found nothing else to
say. There did not seem to be any way Malfoy could
have brought a dangerous or Dark object into the
school. He looked hopefully at Ron, who was sitting
with his arms folded, staring over at Lavender Brown. “Can you think of any way Malfoy — ?” “Oh, drop it, Harry,” said Ron. “Listen, it’s not my fault Slughorn invited Hermione
and me to his stupid party, neither of us wanted to
go, you know!” said Harry, firing up. “Well, as I’m not invited to any parties,” said Ron,
getting to his feet again, “I think I’ll go to bed.” He stomped off toward the door to the boys’
dormitories, leaving Harry and Hermione staring after
him. “Harry?” said the new Chaser, Demelza Robins,
appearing suddenly at his shoulder. “I’ve got a
message for you.” “From Professor Slughorn?” asked Harry, sitting up
hopefully. “No ... from Professor Snape,” said Demelza. Harry’s
heart sank. “He says you’re to come to his office at
half past eight tonight to do your detention — er — no
matter how many party invitations you’ve received.
And he wanted you to know you’ll be sorting out
rotten flobberworms from good ones, to use in Potions
and — and he says there’s no need to bring protective
gloves.” “Right,” said Harry grimly. “Thanks a lot, Demelza.”  SILVER AND OPALS Where was Dumbledore, and what was he doing?
Harry caught sight of the headmaster only twice over
the next few weeks. He rarely appeared at meals
anymore, and Harry was sure Hermione was right in
thinking that he was leaving the school for days at a
time. Had Dumbledore forgotten the lessons he was
supposed to be giving Harry? Dumbledore had said
that the lessons were leading to something to do with
the prophecy; Harry had felt bolstered, comforted,
and now he felt slightly abandoned. Halfway through October came their first trip of the
term to Hogsmeade. Harry had wondered whether
these trips would still be allowed, given the
increasingly tight security measures around the
school, but was pleased to know that they were going
ahead; it was always good to get out of the castle
grounds for a few hours. Harry woke early on the morning of the trip, which
was proving stormy, and whiled away the time until  breakfast by reading his copy of Advanced Potion-
Making. He did not usually lie in bed reading his
textbooks; that sort of behavior, as Ron rightly said,
was indecent in anybody except Hermione, who was
simply weird that way. Harry felt, however, that the
Half-Blood Prince’s copy of Advanced Potion-Making
hardly qualified as a textbook. The more Harry pored
over the book, the more he realized how much was in
there, not only the handy hints and shortcuts on
potions that were earning him such a glowing
reputation with Slughorn, but also the imaginative
little jinxes and hexes scribbled in the margins, which
Harry was sure, judging by the crossings-out and
revisions, that the Prince had invented himself. Harry had already attempted a few of the Prince’s self-
invented spells. There had been a hex that caused
toenails to grow alarmingly fast (he had tried this on
Crabbe in the corridor, with very entertaining results);
a jinx that glued the tongue to the roof of the mouth
(which he had twice used, to general applause, on an
unsuspecting Argus Filch); and, perhaps most useful
of all, Muffliato, a spell that filled the ears of anyone
nearby with an unidentifiable buzzing, so that lengthy
conversations could be held in class without being
overheard. The only person who did not find these
charms amusing was Hermione, who maintained a
rigidly disapproving expression throughout and
refused to talk at all if Harry had used the Muffliato
spell on anyone in the vicinity. Sitting up in bed, Harry turned the book sideways so
as to examine more closely the scribbled instructions
for a spell that seemed to have caused the Prince
some trouble. There were many crossings-out and
alterations, but finally, crammed into a corner of the
page, the scribble: Levicorpus (nvbl)
While the wind and sleet pounded relentlessly on the
windows, and Neville snored loudly, Harry stared at
the letters in brackets. Nvbl ... that had to mean
“nonverbal.” Harry rather doubted he would be able
to bring off this particular spell; he was still having
difficulty with nonverbal spells, something Snape had
been quick to comment on in every D.A.D.A. class. On
the other hand, the Prince had proved a much more
effective teacher than Snape so far. Pointing his wand at nothing in particular, he gave it
an upward flick and said Levicorpusl inside his head. “ Aaaaaaaargh ! ” There was a flash of light and the room was full of
voices: Everyone had woken up as Ron had let out a
yell. Harry sent Advanced Potion-Making flying in
panic; Ron was dangling upside down in midair as
though an invisible hook had hoisted him up by the
ankle. “Sorry!” yelled Harry, as Dean and Seamus roared
with laughter, and Neville picked himself up from the
floor, having fallen out of bed. “Hang on — I’ll let you
down — ” He groped for the potion book and riffled through it in
a panic, trying to find the right page; at last he
located it and deciphered one cramped word
underneath the spell: Praying that this was the
counter-jinx, Harry thought Liberacorpus\ with all his
might. There was another flash of light, and Ron fell in a
heap onto his mattress. “Sorry,” repeated Harry weakly, while Dean and
Seamus continued to roar with laughter.
“Tomorrow,” said Ron in a muffled voice, “I’d rather
you set the alarm clock.” By the time they had got dressed, padding themselves
out with several of Mrs. Weasley’s hand-knitted
sweaters and carrying cloaks, scarves, and gloves,
Ron’s shock had subsided and he had decided that
Harry’s new spell was highly amusing; so amusing, in
fact, that he lost no time in regaling Hermione with
the story as they sat down for breakfast. "... and then there was another flash of light and I
landed on the bed again!” Ron grinned, helping
himself to sausages. Hermione had not cracked a smile during this
anecdote, and now turned an expression of wintry
disapproval upon Harry. “Was this spell, by any chance, another one from that
potion book of yours?” she asked. Harry frowned at her. “Always jump to the worst conclusion, don’t you?”
“Was it?” “Well ... yeah, it was, but so what?” “So you just decided to try out an unknown,
handwritten incantation and see what would
happen?” “Why does it matter if it’s handwritten?” said Harry,
preferring not to answer the rest of the question. “Because it’s probably not Ministry of Magic-
approved,” said Hermione. “And also,” she added, as
Harry and Ron rolled their eyes, “because I’m starting
to think this Prince character was a bit dodgy.” Both Harry and Ron shouted her down at once. “It was a laugh!” said Ron, upending a ketchup bottle
over his sausages. “Just a laugh, Hermione, that’s
all!” “Dangling people upside down by the ankle?” said
Hermione. “Who puts their time and energy into
making up spells like that?” “Fred and George,” said Ron, shrugging, “it’s their
kind of thing. And, er — ” “My dad,” said Harry. He had only just remembered. “What?” said Ron and Hermione together. “My dad used this spell,” said Harry. “I — Lupin told
me.” This last part was not true; in fact, Harry had seen
his father use the spell on Snape, but he had never
told Ron and Hermione about that particular
excursion into the Pensieve. Now, however, a
wonderful possibility occurred to him. Could the Half-
Blood Prince possibly be — ? “Maybe your dad did use it, Harry,” said Hermione,
“but he’s not the only one. We’ve seen a whole bunch
of people use it, in case you’ve forgotten. Dangling
people in the air. Making them float along, asleep,
helpless.” Harry stared at her. With a sinking feeling, he too
remembered the behavior of the Death Eaters at the
Quidditch World Cup. Ron came to his aid.
“That was different,” he said robustly. “They were
abusing it. Harry and his dad were just having a
laugh. You don’t like the Prince, Hermione,” he added,
pointing a sausage at her sternly, “because he’s better
than you at Potions — ” “It’s got nothing to do with that!” said Hermione, her
cheeks reddening. “I just think it’s very irresponsible
to start performing spells when you don’t even know
what they’re for, and stop talking about ‘the Prince’ as
if it’s his title, I bet it’s just a stupid nickname, and it
doesn’t seem as though he was a very nice person to
me!” “I don’t see where you get that from,” said Harry
heatedly. “If he’d been a budding Death Eater he
wouldn’t have been boasting about being ‘half-blood,’
would he?” Even as he said it, Harry remembered that his father
had been pure-blood, but he pushed the thought out
of his mind; he would worry about that later. ... “The Death Eaters can’t all be pure-blood, there aren’t
enough pure-blood wizards left,” said Hermione
stubbornly. “I expect most of them are half-bloods
pretending to be pure. It’s only Muggle-borns they
hate, they’d be quite happy to let you and Ron join
up.” “There is no way they’d let me be a Death Eater!” said
Ron indignantly, a bit of sausage flying off the fork he
was now brandishing at Hermione and hitting Ernie
Macmillan on the head. “My whole family are blood
traitors! That’s as bad as Muggle-borns to Death
Eaters!”
