 'Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of Rohan!' he
answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile. When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors. There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords and
chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby. 'Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,' said
Thjoden. 'I have no child. Thjodred my son is slain. I name Jomer my
sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as
you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind,
to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?' No man spoke. 'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?'
'In the House of Eorl,' answered Hbma. 'But Jomer I cannot spare, nor would he stay,' said the king; 'and he
is the last of that House.' 'I said not Jomer,' answered Hbma. 'And he is not the last. There is
Jowyn, daughter of Jomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All
love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.' 'It shall be so,' said Thjoden. 'Let the heralds announce to the folk
that the Lady Jowyn will lead them!' Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Jowyn knelt before
him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. 'Larewell
sister-daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return to
the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves,
and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she
answered. 'A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your
return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby. 'The king shall come again,' he said. 'Lear not! Not West but East does
our doom await us.' The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The others
followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the gate. Alone Jowyn
stood before the doors of the house at the stair's head; the sword was set
upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was clad now
in mail and shone like silver in the sun. Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his shoulder. 'Well, at last we
set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My axe is restless in
my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell -handed when they
come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare that suits me. How shall I
come to the battle? I wish I could walk and not bump like a sack at
Gandalf 's saddlebow.' 'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf
will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Shadowfax
himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.' 'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is ore-necks I would hew, not shave the
scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe. At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in
the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like
a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they shouted as Thjoden came forth.
Some held in readiness the king's horse, Snowmane, and others held the
horses of Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Jomer
came up to him, leading his horse. ’Hail, Gimli Gluin’s son!’ he cried. ’I have not had time to learn
gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put aside
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.’ ’I will forget my wrath for a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli; 'but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then you
shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our friendship will end.' 'So be it!’ said Jomer. 'But until that time pardon me, and in token of
pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the
Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.' 'I thank you indeed,' said Gimli greatly pleased. 'I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.' 'It shall he so,' said Jomer. 'Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon
my right, and none will dare to stand before us!' 'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf. 'Running wild over the grass,' they answered. 'He will let no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow among the
willows.' Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse's name, and far away he
tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host like an
arrow. 'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would
it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the
wizard. 'The gift seems already to be given,' said Thjoden. 'But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsellors; most
welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while
our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.' 'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw back
his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He wore no
helm nor mail. His snowy hair flew free in the wind, his white robes shone
dazzling in the sun. 'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words. 'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!' The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear clashed on
shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset
of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode thundering into the West. Far
over the plain Jowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood still,
alone before the doors of the silent house.
Chapter 7. Helm's Deep The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the light
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden
haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the foot-hills of the
White Mountains, and this they followed, up and down in a green country,
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the
Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker and taller they grew as the miles went
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind. The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode
with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and enduring were the
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty leagues and more
it was, as a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of the Isen, where they
hoped to find the king’s men that held back the hosts of Saruman. Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp. They
had ridden for some five hours and were far out upon the western plain, yet
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no
fires, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted
guards about them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in
the folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again. There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the air; it
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy, and behind it,
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a great
storm moving out of the East. And away in the North-west there seemed to be
another darkness brooding about the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale. Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer. ’You have the
keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,’ he said; ’and they can tell a
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder
towards Isengard?’ ’Many miles lie between,’ said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his
eyes with his long hand. ’I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in
it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I
cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a
veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly
down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing
downwards from the hills.' 'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be
a black night.' As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre
canopy with great billowing edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went
down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of the Riders were tipped with
fire as the last shafts of light kindled the steep faces of the peaks of
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood on the northernmost arm of the White
Mountains, three jagged horns staring at the sunset. In the last red glow
men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them.
They halted awaiting him. He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly he
climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length he spoke. 'Is Jomer here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late, and with too
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Thjodred fell. We were driven
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing.
Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All
Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and
herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We
were overmastered. The shield- wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The
rest are scattered. 'Where is Jomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to
Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.' Thjoden had sat silent,
hidden from the man's sight behind his guards; now he urged his horse
forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!' he said. 'I am here. The last host
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.' The man's face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself up. Then
he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. 'Command me, lord!' he
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought—' 'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter
snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the
boughs,' said Thjoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help
of Erkenbrand!' While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead, and he sat
there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the setting sun. Now he
came back. 'Ride, Thjoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax
must bear me now on a swift errand.' Turning to Aragorn and Jomer and the
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!' He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow the great
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the
sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that fled and passed from sight.
Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the
wing could have overtaken him. 'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma. 'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hbma. 'Ever he goes
and comes unlooked-for:' 'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain 'Said the
other. 'True enough,' said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will wait until I see
Gandalf again.' 'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other. The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and bent
their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The hills drew
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening
sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of the Westfold Vale, lay a
green coomb, a great bay in the mountains, out of which a gorge opened in
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's Deep, after a hero of old wars
who had made his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward
from the north under the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crow-haunted
cliffs rose like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light. At Helm's Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur stood high walls
of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower. Men said that in the
far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings had built here this
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet
sounded upon the tower echoed in the Deep behind, as if armies
long -forgotten were issuing to war from caves beneath the hills. A wall,
too, the men of old had made from the Hornburg to the southern cliff,
barring the entrance to the gorge. Beneath it by a wide culvert the
Deeping-stream passed out. About the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and
flowed then in a gully through the midst of a wide green gore, sloping
gently down from Helm's Gate to Helm's Dike. Thence it fell into the
Deeping-coomb and out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at
Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had repaired
the wall and made the fastness strong. The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the Coomb,
when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported
that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and that a host of Ores and wild
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of Isen and seemed to be
making for Helm's Deep. 'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said
the scout. 'And we have met scattered companies, going this way and that,
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem to know. It is likely
that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm's Gate, if he has not
already perished.' 'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Thjoden. 'Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse, passing
hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some thought he
was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall towards Isengard.
Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier, going northward with a
company of Ores.' 'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said
Thjoden. 'Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and the new.
But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to
Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the
host that comes from the North?' 'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He that flies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt that the
main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.' 'Then let us be swift,' said Jomer. 'Let us drive through such foes as
are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills. Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. ’Saruman has long spied out
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!' Aragorn and Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark
night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed
southward, higher and higher into the dim folds about the mountains' feet.
They found few of the enemy before them. Here and there they came upon
roving bands of Ores; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them. 'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain
he has sent forth.' The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the
dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up into the
Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless
points of fiery light upon the black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or
winding up from the lowlands in long flickering lines. Here and there a
larger blaze leapt up. 'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn. 'They bring fire,' said Thjoden, 'and they are burning as they come,
rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for
my folk!' 'Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.' 'We need not fly much further,' said Jomer. 'Not far ahead now lies
Helm's Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the coomb, two
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.' 'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It is a mile
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.' 'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,' said
Jomer. There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the breach in
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran
down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed suddenly before them, a high
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them. 'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer
son of Jomund, speak.' This is good tidings beyond hope,' said the sentinel. 'Hasten! The
enemy is on your heels.' The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping sward
above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left many men to
hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither. 'Maybe, we have a thousand fit to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old
man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But most of them have seen
too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son's son here. What news of
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all that
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.' 'I fear that he will not come now,' said Jomer. 'Our scouts have gained
no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.' 'I would that he had escaped,' said Thjoden. 'He was a mighty man. In
him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await
him here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?
We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a
siege.' 'Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of
Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store
of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.' 'That is well,' said Jomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is
left in the vale.' 'If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a
high price,' said Gamling. The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg
and the barrier wall. Quickly Jomer set his men in readiness. The king and the men of his
household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of the
Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind it, Jomer
arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the defence seemed more
doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were
led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared. The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over which only a tall
man could look. Here and there were clefts in the stone through which men
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led also up
on to the wall from the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the
great stones of it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff. Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom. This is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping on the stones. 'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here.
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came up from the
dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place
that armies would break upon like water.’ ’I do not doubt it,' said Legolas. 'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by
the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more
of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers
of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after
their fashion, but there are too few here, too few.' 'It is dark for archery,' said Gimli. 'Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is
tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of ore-necks
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!' A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered fires still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their torches
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines. Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the fierce battle-cries
of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and clustered
thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping
back over the field and up the ramp to the gate of the Hornburg. The
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in. 'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow that we had,
and filled the Dike with Ores. But it will not halt them long. Already they
are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching ants. But we have
taught them not to carry torches.' It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness
of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were seared by a
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a
staring moment the watchers on the walls saw all the space between them and
the Dike lit with white light: it was boiling and crawling with black
shapes, some squat and broad, some tall and grim, with high helms and sable
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through
the breach. The dark tide flowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff. Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down. Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell
clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The assault on
Helm's Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was heard within; no
answering arrows came. The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and
wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the Ores
screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that
stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men of the Mark amazed looked
out, as it seemed to them, upon a great field of dark corn, tossed by a
tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light. Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some against the
Deeping Wall, other towards the causeway and the ramp that led up to the
Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Ores were mustered, and the wild men of the
Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then on they came. The lightning
flashed, and blazoned upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards
the gates. Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a hail of
stones. They wavered, broke, and fled back; and then charged again, broke
and charged again; and each time, like the incoming sea, they halted at a
higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring men leaped forth.
They held their great shields above them like a roof, while in their midst
they bore two trunks of mighty trees. Behind them ore-archers crowded,
sending a hail of darts against the bowmen on the walls. They gained the
gates. The trees, swung by strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending
boom. If any man fell, crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed. Jomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They heard the
roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in a sudden flash of
light they beheld the peril of the gates. 'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!' Running like fire, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and
passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered a
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an
angle of the burg- wall on the west, where the cliff stretched out to meet
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the
wall and the sheer brink of the Rock. Together Jomer and Aragorn sprang
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath
as one. 'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!' 'And®ril!' cried Aragorn. 'And®ril for the D®nedain!' Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild men.
And®ril rose and fell, gleaming with white fire. A shout went up from wall
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to war. The Blade that was Broken shines
again!' Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight; but the
wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they were
swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony stream below.
The ore-archers shot wildly and then fled. For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was
rumbling in the distance now. The lightning flickered still, far off among
the mountains in the South. A keen wind was blowing from the North again.
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills
of the Coomb-side the westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the
storm-wrack. 'We did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking at the gates. Their
great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of their timbers
were cracked. 'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,' said Jomer.
'Look!' He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Ores and Men
were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and skipped on the
stones about them. 'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile
stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!' They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Ores that had lain
motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently and
swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Jomer's heels, tripped
him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But a small dark figure that
none had observed sprang out of the shadows and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk
Khazvd! Khazvd ai-mknu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Ores fell
headless. The rest fled. Jomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid. The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside
with stones. When all were safe within, Jomer turned: ’I thank you, Gimli
son of Gluin!' he said. ’I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?’ ’I followed you to shake off sleep,’ said Gimli; 'but I looked on the
hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see
your sword-play.’ ’I shall not find it easy to repay you,’ said Jomer. ’There may be many a chance ere the night is over,’ laughed the Dwarf. ’But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.’ ’Two!’ said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the
wall. ’Two?’ said Legolas. ’I have done better, though now I must grope for
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But
that is only a few leaves in a forest.’ The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining
brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the Mark. The
enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than diminished, still more
were pressing up from the valley through the breach. The sortie upon the
Rock gained only a brief respite. The assault on the gates was redoubled.
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Ores and
hillmen swarmed about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks
were hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or fling them
back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin,
but many more replaced them, and Ores sprang up them like apes in the dark
forests of the South. Before the wall’s foot the dead and broken were piled
like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the
enemy came on. The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and every
shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields were riven.
Three times Aragorn and Jomer rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall. Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Ores had crept like rats
through the culvert through which the stream flowed out. There they had
gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above was hottest
and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the wall's top. Then
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of the Deep and were
among the horses, fighting with the guards. Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce cry that echoed in the
cliffs. 'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough. 'Ai-oi!' he shouted. 'The Ores are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazvd ai-mknu!' Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice
of the dwarf above all the tumult. 'The Ores are in the Deep!' he cried.
'Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped down the stair from
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back. Their onset was fierce and sudden, and the Ores gave way before them.
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the guardians
of the hidden caves. 'Twenty -one!' cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and laid the
last Ore before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.' 'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling. 'Dwarves are said to be
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!' 'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,'
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.' They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find
to hand, and under Gimli's direction the Westfold-men blocked up the inner
end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet remained. Then the
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff. 'It will be drier above,' said Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see how
things go on the wall!' He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was
whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in the assault, since
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled. 'Twenty-one!' said Gimli. 'Good!' said Legolas. 'But my count is now two dozen. It has been
knife- work up here.' Jomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the left the
crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again. But the
Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates lay in ruin;
but over the barricade of beams and stones within no enemy as yet had
passed. Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping behind
the western hills that enclosed the valley. 'This is a night as long as
years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?' 'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him.
'But dawn will not help us, I fear.' 'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn. 'But these creatures of Isengard, these half-ores and goblin-men that
the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the sun,' said
Gamling. 'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their
voices?' 'I hear them,' said Jomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.' 'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I
know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was spoken in
many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take
their king. Death to the Forgoil! Death to the Strawheads ! Death to the
robbers of the North!' Such names they have for us. Not in half a thousand
years have they forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the
Mark to Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman
has inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They will not give way now
for dusk or dawn, until Thjoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.' 'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn. 'Is it not said
that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?' 'So the minstrels say,' said Jomer. 'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn. Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there was a
crash and a flash of flame and smoke. The waters of the Deeping-stream
poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping hole
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in. 'Devilry of Saruman!' cried Aragorn. 'They have crept in the culvert
again, while we talked, and they have lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our
feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into the breach; but
even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised against the battlements.
Over the wall and under the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark
wave upon a hill of sand. The defence was swept away. Some of the Riders
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting as
they gave way, step by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back
towards the citadel. A broad stairway, climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his hand still
And®ril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while held back the
enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair passed up towards the
gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas. His bow was bent, but one
gleaned arrow was all that he had left, and he peered out now, ready to
shoot the first Ore that should dare to approach the stair. 'All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,' he called. 'Come
back!' Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled in his
weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the Ores, yelling,
with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The foremost fell with
Legolas' last arrow in his throat, but the rest sprang over him. Then a
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above, crashed down upon the stair,
and hurled them back into the Deep. Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it
clanged to behind him. 'Things go ill, my friends,' he said, wiping the sweat from his brow
with his arm. 'Ill enough,' said Legolas, 'but not yet hopeless, while we have you
with us. Where is Gimli?' 'I do not know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw him fighting on the ground
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.' 'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas. 'He is stout and strong,' said Aragorn. 'Let us hope that he will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we.
Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.' That must be my hope" said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.' 'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,' laughed
Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.' 'I must go and seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night
would end, and I could have better light for shooting.' Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he learned
that Jomer had not reached the Hornburg. 'Nay, he did not come to the Rock,' said one of the Westfold-men, 'I
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting in the mouth of the Deep.
Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.' Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high
chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow window,
looking out upon the vale. 'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said. 'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away; but
many have escaped hither to the Rock.' 'Is Jomer here?' 'No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and some say
that Jomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy
and come within the caves. What hope they may have then I do not know.' 'More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome
there because of the outlets through fissures in the rock far above. None
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.' 'But the Ores have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They
have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in
the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But now we must turn all
our thoughts to our own defence.' 'I fret in this prison,' said Thjoden. 'If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the
joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.' 'Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the Mark,'
said Aragorn. 'More hope we have to defend you in the Hornburg than in
Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.' 'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,' said
Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers
and such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so
great, maybe 1 should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the
morning sun.' 'Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said
Aragorn. 'The end will not be long,' said the king. 'But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the horses of
my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will bid men sound
Helm's horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with me then, son of
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.' 'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn. Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.
Legolas went with him. Blasts of fire leaped up from below shaking the
stones. Grappling -hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the
Ores gained the summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them
down. At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts of
the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale. Then he
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley. The Ores yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you
wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are the fighting
Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does not come. Bring out
your skulking king!' 'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn. 'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.' 'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn. 'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai: we do not stop
the fight for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come to kill,
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?' 'None knows what the new day shall bring him,' said Aragorn. 'Get you
gone, ere it turn to your evil.' 'Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no
parley. You have nothing to say.' 'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No enemy has yet taken
the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.' So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there
alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that many of
the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Ores laughed with loud voices;
and a hail of darts and arrows whistled over the wall, as Aragorn leaped
down. There was a roar and a blast of fire. The archway of the gate above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke and
dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn ran to the
king's tower. But even as the gate fell, and the Ores about it yelled, preparing to
charge, a murmur arose behind them, like a wind in the distance, and it grew
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the dawn. The Ores upon
the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back. And then,
sudden and terrible, from the tower above, the sound of the great horn of
Helm rang out. All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Ores cast themselves on
their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back from the Deep the
echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald
stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes
did not die. Ever the horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now and
louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free. 'Helm! Helm!' the Riders shouted. 'Helm is arisen and comes back to
war. Helm for Thjoden King!' And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow, golden
was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was Aragorn,
Elendil's heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of Eorl the Young.
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed. 'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from
the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove through
the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them from the Deep came
the stern cries of men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out
poured all the men that were left upon the Rock. And ever the sound of
blowing horns echoed in the hills. On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell
or fled before them. Neither ore nor man withstood them. Their backs were to
the swords and spears of the Riders and their faces to the valley. They
cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder had come upon them with the
rising of the day. So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to the great
Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the
sun flared above the eastern hills and glimmered on their spears. But they
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb. The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its grassy
slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest loomed. Great
trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled bough and hoary
head; their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was
under them. Between the Dike and the eaves of that nameless wood only two
open furlongs lay. There now cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror
of the king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate
until all above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed
like swarming flies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the walls of
the coomb, seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and stony was the
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached. There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in
the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding. Behind him,
hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men on foot; their swords
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong. His shield was
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn
and blew a ringing blast. 'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!' 'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!' 'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.' The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach
of the Dike charged the king's company. Down from the hills leaped
Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a deer that runs
surefooted in the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror
of his coming filled the enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their
faces before him. The Ores reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and
spear. Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they
passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever
came again.
Chapter 8 . The Road to Isengard So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf
the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the Deeping -stream.
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden Elouse. About them were gathered the
Rohirrim, the Riders of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and
their eyes were turned towards the wood. Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who
had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling the Old, and Jomer
son of Jomund, and beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. Ele had no helm,
and about his head was a linen band stained with blood; but his voice was loud
and strong. ’Forty -two, Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My axe is notched: the
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?' 'You have passed my score by one,' answered Legolas. 'But I do not
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!' 'Welcome, Jomer, sister-son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I
am glad indeed.' 'Hail, Lord of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has passed and
day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and
gazed in wonder, first at the wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said. 'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and meet you
here.' 'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming.
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!' 'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good
counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your own valour
has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men marching through the
night.' Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced
darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows, as if they
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
Gandalf laughed long and merrily. The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond
the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope
the event has proved.' 'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?' said Thjoden. 'Not
Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet
to learn?' 'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,' said Gandalf: 'a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang. Ere iron was found or tree was hewn, When young was mountain under moon; Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe, It walked the forests long ago. ' 'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Thjoden. 'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard '
answered Gandalf. 'To Isengard?' they cried. 'Yes,' said Gandalf. 'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.' 'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all
gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the
stronghold of Saruman,' said Thjoden. 'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the
moon!' 'Nay!' said Thjoden. 'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we
will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.' 'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,' said Gandalf, 'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?' 'My men are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and I am weary also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not feigned nor
due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can
wholly cure, not even Gandalf.' 'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will
journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel
that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth.
But do not command many men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to a parley
not to a fight.' The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses, and he
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark would hold an assembly of all that
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To ride with him to
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With
Gandalf would go Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf
would not stay behind. 'It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.' 'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn. The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quiet
as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of his chosen company
rested also. But the others, all that were not hurt or wounded, began a
great labour; for many had fallen in the battle and lay dead upon the field
or in the Deep. No Ores remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great many
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid, and cried for
mercy. The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work. 'Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,' said
Erkenbrand; 'and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and then you
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded by Saruman. Many
of you have got death as the reward of your trust in him; but had you
conquered, little better would your wages have been.' The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told them that the men
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive. In the midst of the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised,
and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who fell in the
defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those of Westfold upon
the other. In a_ grave alone under the shadow of the Hornburg lay Hbma,
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate.
The Ores were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of Men, not
far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were troubled in their
minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for burial or for burning. They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to
the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt neither bark
nor bough at their great peril. 'Let the Ores lie,' said Gandalf. ’The morning may bring new counsel.' In the afternoon the King's company prepared to depart. The work of
burial was then but beginning; and Thjoden mourned for the loss of Hbma, his
captain, and cast the first earth upon his grave. 'Great injury indeed has
Saruman done to me and all this land,' he said; 'and I will remember it,
when we meet.' The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the Coomb,
when at last Thjoden and Gandalf and their companions rode down from the
Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host, both of the Riders and of the
people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out
from the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell
silent, wondering what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and
they feared them. The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man, they were
unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow or a
mist was about them. The ends of their long sweeping boughs hung down like
searching fingers, their roots stood up from the ground like the limbs of
strange monsters, and dark caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went
forward, leading the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs; and
through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their amazement
they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream beside it; and the
sky was open above and full of golden light. But on either side the great
aisles of the wood were already wrapped in dusk, stretching away into
impenetrable shadows; and there they heard the creaking and groaning of
boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily.
No Ore or other living creature could be seen. Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and they
kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood. 'It is hot in here,' said Legolas to Gandalf. 'I feel a great wrath
about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?' ’Yes,' said Gandalf. ’What has become of the miserable Ores?’ said Legolas. ’That, I think, no one will ever know,’ said Gandalf. They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing from
side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds of the
wood, if Gimli had allowed it. ’These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,’ he said; 'and I have
seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there were
leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time I might come
to understand their thought.’ ’No, no!’ said Gimli. 'Let us leave them! I guess their thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing
and strangling.’ ’Not of all that go on two legs,’ said Legolas. 'There I think you are
wrong. It is Ores that they hate. For they do not belong here and know
little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.’ ’Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,’ said Gimli. ’I
should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land,
more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever grew: my heart is still
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas ! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say!
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas,
do you know that the caverns of Helm’s Deep are vast and beautiful? There
would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such
things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief
glance!’ ’And I would give gold to be excused,’ said Legolas; 'and double to be
let out, if I strayed in!’ ’You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,’ said Gimli. ’But you speak
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long ago? They are
but hovels compared with the caverns I have seen here: immeasurable halls,
filled with an everlasting music of water that tinkles into pools, as fair
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight.
'And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the sandy
floors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and crystals and
veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the light glows
through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen
Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose, Legolas,
fluted and twisted into dreamlike forms; they spring up from many-coloured
floors to meet the glistening pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains
fine as frozen clouds; spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered
with clear glass; cities, such as the mind of Durin could scarce have
imagined in his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on
into the dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop
falls, and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they
fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another chamber and another
dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas; hall opening out of hall,
dome after dome, stair beyond stair; and still the winding paths lead on
into the mountains' heart. Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the
chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.' 'Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,' said the
Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do
not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your
account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.' 'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be unmoved by
such loveliness. None of Durin's race would mine those caves for stones or
ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there. Do you cut down groves of
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades
of flowering stone, not quarry them. With cautious skill, tap by tap — a
small chip of rock and no more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day — so we
could work, and as the years went by, we should open up new ways, and
display far chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond
fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone in Khazad-dym; and when we wished we would drive away
the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and when we desired
rest, we would let the night return.'
'You move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like
this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen these caves.
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.' 'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. 'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves
and share their wonder with me.' 'You have my promise,' said Legolas. 'But alas! Now we must leave
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?' 'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf: 'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.' 'And when we come there, what shall we see?' asked Gimli. 'You may
know, but I cannot guess.' 'I do not know myself for certain,' answered the wizard. 'I was there
at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet I think that
you will not say that the journey was in vain — not though the Glittering
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.' At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they had
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm's Deep
branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As
they rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas halted and looked back
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry. 'There are eyes!' he said. 'Eyes looking out from the shadows of the
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.' The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas
started to ride back. 'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do as you please in your madness, but let me
first get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!' 'Stay, Legolas
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not
your time.' Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange
shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with
hide of close-fitting grey and brown. Their limbs were long, and their hands
had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.
They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were not looking at the riders:
their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly they lifted their long hands to
their mouths, and sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes of a horn, but
more musical and various. The calls were answered; and turning again, the
riders saw other creatures of the same kind approaching, striding through
the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in
their gait, but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat
quicker than the heron's wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some
set their hands upon their sword-hilts. 'You need no weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are
not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.' So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished. 'Herdsmen!' said Thjoden. 'Where are their flocks? What are they,
Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.' 'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land
who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your
question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only
in idle fancy? Nay, Thjoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the
passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Thjoden the Old are of
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.' The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at length. 'Out of the shadows of
legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I think. I
have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our beasts and our
fields, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden away to help in the
wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life of Men, the way of the
world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we
have that tell of these things, but we are forgetting them, teaching them
only to children, as a careless custom. And now the songs have come down
among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.' 'You should be glad, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only the
little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things
which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even
if you know them not.' 'Yet also I should be sad,' said Thjoden. ’For however the fortune of
war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?' 'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on
with the journey we have begun!' The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the wood and
took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set,
already it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but as they rode out from
the shadow of the hills and looked west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was
still red, and a burning light was under the floating clouds. Dark against
it there wheeled and flew many black -winged birds. Some passed overhead
with mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks. 'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer. They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the plains about
them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards the full, and in its cold
silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from the branching of the roads when
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river
spread in stony shoals between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind
they heard the howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the
many men that had fallen in battle in this place. The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were
three lines of flat stepping-stones across the stream, and between them
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings, and it seemed strange to them;
for the Fords had ever been a place full of the rush and chatter of water
upon stones; but now they were silent. The beds of the stream were almost
dry, a bare waste of shingles and grey sand. 'This is become a dreary place,' said Jomer. 'What sickness has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he devoured
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf. 'Alas!' said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts
devour so many good Riders of the Mark?' This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but
you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them. It is with their friends, the Ores, that they hold their feast: such indeed
is the friendship of their kind. Come!’ They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased their
howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon, and
Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders passed over to the
islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks. 'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.’ And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled, ringed
with stones, and set about with many spears. ’Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,’ said
Gandalf. 'Here let them rest!' said Jomer. 'And when their spears have rotted
and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!' 'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?' said Thjoden. 'You
accomplished much in an evening and a night!' 'With the help of Shadowfax — and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast
and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your comfort: many
fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were
scattered than were slain; I gathered together all that I could find. Some
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make
this burial. They have now followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with
many Riders to Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength
against you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and
gone to Helm's Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I feared that
wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to Meduseld, while it was
undefended. But now I think you need not fear: you will find your house to
welcome your return.' 'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Thjoden, 'though brief now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.' With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound, and
passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad
to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the howling of the wolves
broke out anew. There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the
crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending with it
east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went straight
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the
west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from its mouth. This road they
followed but they did not ride upon it; for the ground beside it was firm
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind.
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They
were come to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan
Curunnr stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky. ’What do you think of that, Gandalf?' asked Aragorn. 'One would say
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.' 'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,' said Jomer: 'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.' 'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing.
Now let us rest for a while, if we can.' They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were shining above; but over
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night. On both sides of
the river it rolled towards them, going northward. 'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will
pass you by!' A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered
faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable gloom; they
were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices they heard,
whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh; the earth shook
under them. Long it seemed to them that they sat and were afraid; but at
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's
arms. Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard a great
noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid
and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning they went out and were
amazed; for the slain Ores were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the
valley of the Deep the grass was crushed and trampled brown, as if giant
herdsmen had pastured great droves of cattle there; but a mile below the
Dike a huge pit had been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled
into a hill. Men believed that the Ores whom they had slain were buried
there; but whether those who had fled into the wood were with them, none
could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it was
afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were
never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had returned at night, and had gone
far away to the dark dales of Fangorn. Thus they were revenged upon the
Ores. The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw and
heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river beside them
suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying down among the stones;
and when it had passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it
had ever done. At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale, and
they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog,
and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the
highway. It was broad and hard, and well-tended. Dimly through the mists
they could descry the long arm of the mountains rising on their left. They
had passed into Nan Curunnr, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley,
open only to the South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the
Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was
fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills, and all
about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land. It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres
tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had become a
wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the ground, or
clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts
housed. No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses could still be seen the
burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It was a sad country, silent
now but for the stony noise of quick waters. Smokes and steams drifted in
sullen clouds and lurked in the hollows. The riders did not speak. Many
doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led. After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of grass
was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, filled with trickling water, ran down
on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black;
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness of a
long White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew that the
gates of Isengard must stand, and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes
could not pierce the mists ahead. Beneath the mountain's arm within the Wizard's Vale through years
uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. Partly it
was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty works the Men of
Westernesse had wrought there of old; and Saruman had dwelt there long and
had not been idle. This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted by
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs,
stood out from the shelter of the mountain- side, from which it ran and then
returned again. One entrance only was there made in it, a great arch delved
in the southern wall. Here through the black rock a long tunnel had been
hewn, closed at either end with mighty doors of iron. They were so wrought
and poised upon their huge hinges, posts of steel driven into the living
stone, that when unbarred they could be moved with a light thrust of the
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of the echoing
tunnel, beheld a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
filled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that
flowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew there in the
latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with stone-flags, dark and
hard; and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron, joined by heavy chains. Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and
tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the open
circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands could
dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with great store of
arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the ground; their upper ends
were covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the
Ring of Isengard looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground
trembled. The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns
far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries, smithies,
and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly, and hammers
thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit from beneath
with red light, or blue, or venomous green. To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood a
tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old, who
smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not made by the
craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in the ancient torment
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was. black and gleaming hard: four
mighty piers of many-sided stone were welded into one, but near the summit
they opened into gaping horns, their pinnacles sharp as the points of
spears, keen-edged as knives. Between them was a narrow space, and there
upon a floor of polished stone, written with strange signs, a man might
stand five hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of
Saruman, the name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for
in the Elvish speech orthanc signifies Mount Fang, but in the language of
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind. A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been
beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor upon the
West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman had slowly shaped it
to his shifting purposes, and made it better, as he thought, being
deceived-for all those arts and subtle devices, for which he forsook his
former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined were his own. came but
from Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model
or a slave's flattery, of that vast fortress, armoury, prison, furnace of
great power, Barad-dyr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed
at flattery, biding its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable
strength. This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for within
living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,
such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw. Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as
he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand appeared no longer
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived
that its nails were red. Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist, and
reluctantly they followed him. All about them now, as if there had been a
sudden flood, wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows,
and rills went trickling down among the stones. At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and saw
that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard. But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about,
stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still stood, but it
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare, and through the
cliff-like walls on either side great rents and breaches had been torn;
their towers were beaten into dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and
fallen on the hills with storm, it could have worked no greater ruin. The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in
which there heaved and floated a wreckage of beams and spars, chests and
casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their splintered
stems above the flood, but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it seemed,
half veiled in winding cloud, there loomed the island rock. Still dark and
tall, unbroken by the storm, the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped
about its feet. The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling,
perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not
guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway and the ruined
gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly
they were aware of two small figures lying on it at their ease, grey-clad,
hardly to be seen among the stones. There were bottles and bowls and
platters laid beside them, as if they had just eaten well, and now rested
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs and arms
behind his head, leaned back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke. For a moment Thjoden and Jomer and all his men stared at them in
wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the strangest
sight. But before the king could speak, the small smoke-breathing figure
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent on the edge of the
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though not
much more than half a man in height; his head of brown curling hair was
uncovered, but he was clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and
shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He
bowed very low. putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Jomer and the king. 'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!' he said. 'We are the doorwardens.
Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who, alas! is
overcome with weariness' — here he gave the other a dig with his foot — 'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our
home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one
Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable
guests.' 'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered
you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?' 'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He has
been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over
the management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan
with fitting words. I have done my best.' 'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?' cried
Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. 'You rascals, you woolly-footed and
wool-pated truants ! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues,
through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you ! And here we find
you feasting and idling -and smoking ! Smoking! Where did you come by the
weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy,
that if I do not burst, it will be a marvel!' 'You speak for me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas. 'Though I would sooner
learn how they came by the wine.' 'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that's brighter
wits,' said Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of
victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few
well-earned comforts!' 'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!' The Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting
of dear friends,' said Thjoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company,
Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen
many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the
Holbytlan?' 'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin. 'Hobbits?' said Thjoden. 'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the
name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does
justice to the truth.' Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord;
or I hope that I may so take your words,' he said. 'And here is another
marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.' 'My people came out of the North long ago,' said Thjoden. 'But I will
not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us
is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds, for
it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to
vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.' 'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry. 'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke
from their mouths.' 'That is not surprising,' answered Merry; 'for it is an art which we
have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold
Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true
pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning.
How old Toby came by the plant...' 'You do not know your danger, Thjoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table,
or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,
and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue
patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking.
Where is Treebeard, Merry?' 'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work — over
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as they looked,
they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was falling
from the mountain-side. Far away came a hoom-hom, as of horns blowing
triumphantly. 'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf. 'There is the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and some others are
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of Saruman's
planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.' 'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his
sides, and he stands as still as a door -tree.' 'It is past noon,' said Gandalf, 'and we at any rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he
leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?' 'He left a message,' said Merry, 'and I was coming to it, but I have
been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the
Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard
there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of
the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He
bowed. Gandalf laughed. 'That is better!' he said. 'Well, Thjoden. will you
ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far.
When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and
the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear
the speech of the oldest of all living things.' 'I will come with you,' said Thjoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits! May we
meet again in my house ! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that
your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!' The hobbits bowed low. 'So that is the King of Rohan!' said Pippin in
an undertone. 'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'
Chapter 9 . Flotsam and Jetsam Gandalf and the King’s company rode away, turning eastward to make the
circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas
remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in search of grass, they
came and sat beside the hobbits. 'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of
us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn. 'And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said
Legolas, 'the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own small
riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still many
things that I should like to know the truth of.' 'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you ' said
Merry. 'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that
is not nearly enough.' 'All in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should
give an account of yourselves to us first.' 'Or second,' said Gimli. 'It would go better after a meal, t have a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends by finding
us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink would pay off some
of my score against you.' 'Then you shall have it,' said Pippin. 'Will you have it here, or in
more comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house— over there under the
arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.' 'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But I will not go into any ore-house
nor touch Ores' meat or anything that they have mauled.' 'We wouldn't ask you to,' said Merry. 'We have had enough of Ores
ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Isengard.
Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Ores. He had Men to guard his
gates: some of his most faithful servants, I suppose. Anyway they were
favoured and got good provisions.' 'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli. 'No, I don't think so,' Merry laughed. 'But that is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.' 'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf.
The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came to a
wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct into a
large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a hearth and
chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once
have been dark, for its windows looked out only into the tunnel. But light
came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning. 'I lit a bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could find was wet.
But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind away up
through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or four days old, I am
afraid.' Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a long
table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors.
’Store-room in there, and above the woods, luckily,’ said Pippin, as they
came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts. ’And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli,’
said Merry. 'This is not ore-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard calls it. Will you have wine or beer? There’s a barrel inside there — very passable. And this is first-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon
and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there is no green stuff: the
deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer
you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread. Are you
content?’ ’Indeed yes,’ said Gimli. ’The score is much reduced.’ The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits,
unabashed, set to a second time. ’We must keep our guests company,’ they
said. ’You are full of courtesy this morning,’ laughed Legolas. ’But maybe,
if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one another
company again.’ ’Maybe; and why not?’ said Pippin. ’We had foul fare with the Ores, and
little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat
to heart’s content.’ ’It does not seem to have done you any harm,’ said Aragorn. 'Indeed you
look in the bloom of health.’ ’Aye, you do indeed,’ said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top
of his cup. ’Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted;
and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.' 'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents only drink, and drink is not enough
for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing, but one feels the need
of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.' 'You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?' said Legolas. 'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.' 'Many strange tales have been told about that land,' said Aragorn. 'I
have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!' 'Ents,' said Pippin, 'Ents are — well Ents are all different for on
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling
words that trailed off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen
some at a distance, already -they saw you at any rate, and reported that you
were on the way-and you will see many others, I expect, before you leave
here. You must form your own ideas.' 'Now, now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story in the middle. I
should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day when
our fellowship was broken.' 'You shall have it, if there is time,' said Merry. 'But first-if you
have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And then for a
little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again, or in
Rivendell.' He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,'
he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We did some
salvage-work this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things floating
about. It was Pippin who found two small barrels, washed up out of some
cellar or store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they were
filled with this: as fine a pipe- weed as you could wish for, and quite
unspoilt.' Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. 'It feels
good, and it smells good,' he said. 'It is good!' said Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There
were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as plain as plain. How it
came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'
'It would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?' 'No, I am afraid not,' said Merry. 'We have not found any, not even
here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself, it seems. And I
don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a
pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes, as good friends must at a pinch.' 'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his
jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or
two near my skin, as precious as Rings to me. Here's one: my old wooden
pipe. And here's another: an unused one. I have carried it a long way,,
though I don't know why. I never really expected to find any pipe- weed on
the journey, when my own ran out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He
held up a small pipe with a wide flattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli.
'Does that settle the score between us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.' 'Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky
are doing!' said Legolas. 'We will come with you,' said Aragorn. They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before the
gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting
and floating away upon the breeze. 'Now let us take our ease here for a little!' said Aragorn. 'We will
sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped
his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long
legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke. 'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!' 'He has never been away,' said Aragorn. 'I am Strider and D®nadan too,
and I belong both to Gondor and the North.' They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting
into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still,
looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and singing softly to
himself. At last he sat up. 'Come now!' he said. 'Time wears on, and the
mists are blowing away, or would if you strange folk did not wreathe
yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?' 'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all
strung-up in an ore-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?'
'The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he said.l 'It seems
a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I
reckon that three very horrible days followed. Merry will correct me, if I
forget anything important: I am not going into details: the whips and the
filth and stench and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he
plunged into an account of Boromir's last fight and the ore-march from Emyn
Muil to the Forest. The others nodded as the various points were fitted in
with their guesses. 'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak and took
from it the two sheathed knives. 'Well!' said Merry. 'I never expected to see those again! I marked a
few ores with mine; but Ugl®k took them from us. How he glared! At first I
thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things away as if they
burned him.' 'And here also is your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept it
safe, for it is a very precious thing.' 'I know,' said Pippin. 'It was a wrench to let it go; but what else
could I do?' 'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away a treasure
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.' 'The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!' said
Gimli. 'Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with both hands,
one might say.' 'And set us a pretty riddle,' said Legolas. 'I wondered if you had
grown wings!' 'Unfortunately not,' said Pippin. 'But you did not know about
Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell of those
last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath, and the dreadful
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms. 'All this about the Ores of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as they call it, makes
me uneasy,' said Aragorn. 'The Dark Lord already knew too much and his
servants also; and Grishnbkh evidently sent some message across the River
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman
at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.' 'Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,' said Merry. 'Things
began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Ores set foot in Rohan.' 'We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,' said
Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.' 'When was that?' asked Pippin. 'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn. 'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the
story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning after the
battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his ent-houses. The
next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is, and the
queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that day and the
next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in
the afternoon in the third day of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It
was amazing. The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing
inside it: then all at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their
song as they marched.' 'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even
if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin. 'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door! There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words, and
was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. But I thought it
was only marching music and no more, just a song — until I got here. I know
better now.' 'We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunnr, after night had
fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the
Forest itself was moving behind us. I thought I was dreaming an entish
dream, but Pippin had noticed it too. We were both frightened; but we did
not find out more about it until later. 'It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in "short language".
Treebeard won't say much about them, but I think they are Ents that have
become almost like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in
the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees; but
deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds and hundreds of them, I
believe. 'There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap themselves
in shadow: it is difficult to see them moving. But they do. They can move
very quickly, if they are angry. You stand still looking at the weather,
maybe, or listening to the rustling of the wind, and then suddenly you find
that you are in the middle of a wood with great groping trees all around
you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents — that is why they
are called Huorns, Treebeard says — but they have become queer and wild.
Dangerous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents
about to look after them. 'Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper
end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We
could not see them, of course, but the whole air was full of creaking. It
was very dark, a cloudy night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they
had left the hills, and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not
appear through the clouds, and not long after midnight there was a tall wood
all round the north side of Isengard. There was no sign of enemies nor of
any challenge. There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower,
that was all. 'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within sight of
the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's
shoulders, and I could feel the quivering tenseness in him. But even when
they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood still as
carved stones, breathing and listening. 'Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the
walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discovered, and that
battle was going to begin. But nothing of the sort. All Saruman's people
were marching away. I don't know much about this war, or about the
Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless
lines of marching Ores; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And
there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches, and in the
flare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary men, rather tall
and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil -looking. But there were
some others that were horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow,
leering, squint-eyed. Do you know, they reminded me at once of that
Southerner at Bree: only he was not so obviously ore-like as most of these
were.' 'I thought of him too,' said Aragorn. 'We had many of these half-ores
to deal with at Helm's Deep. It seems plain now that that Southerner was a
spy of Saruman’s; but whether he was working with the Black Riders, or for
Saruman alone, I do not know. It is difficult with these evil folk to know
when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.' 'Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the
very least,' said Merry. 'They took an hour to pass out of the gates. Some
went off down the highway to the Fords, and some turned away p and went
eastward. A bridge has been built down there, about a mile away, where the
river runs in a very deep channel. You could see it now, if you stood up. They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He
said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.' 'But, though I could not see what was happening in the dark, I believe
that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their
business was with Ores I think. They were far down the valley in the
morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through. 'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard
put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and
calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows and stones from the
walls. But arrows are no use against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and
infuriate them: like stinging flies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of
ore-arrows as a pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be
poisoned, for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher
than bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They
don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe -men to one Ent:
a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of a second blow. A
punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin. 'When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm up, to
get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let out a great hoom-hom, and a
dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers,
and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and they tear it up like
bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great tree-roots in a hundred
years, all packed into a few moments. 'They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang,
crash-crack, in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in ruin;
and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like rabbits in a
sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he
did
not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,
of course; but anyway I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage
alone in a tight place without a lot of slaves and machines and things, if
you know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.’ 'No,' said Aragorn. 'Once he was as great as his fame made him. His
knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marvellously
skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The wise he could
persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still
keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth that I should say were safe, if
they were left alone to talk with him, even now when he has suffered a
defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has
been laid bare, but very few others.' 'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems at one time to have got
round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand them; and he
made the great mistake of leaving them out of his calculations. He had no
plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work.
As soon as our attack began, the few remaining rats in Isengard started
bolting through every hole that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go,
after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I
don't think many ore-folk, of any size, escaped. Not from the Huorns: there
was a wood full of them all round Isengard by that time, as well as those
that had gone down the valley. 'When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to
rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted him,
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march out. When the Ents broke
their way in, he left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the
night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for
Ents to see by, and suddenly Quickbeam gave a cry "The tree-killer, the
tree-killer!" Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he hates Saruman all the
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from ore-axes. He leapt
down the path from the inner gate, and he can move like a wind when he is
roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away in and out of the shadows of
the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs to the tower-door. But it
was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after him, that he was within a step
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door.
’When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set
some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there were many Ents
inside Isengard: some had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from
the north and east; they were roaming about and doing a great deal of
damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over
the plain began to spout and belch. Several of the Ents got scorched and
blistered. One of them, Beechbone I think he was called, a very tall
handsome Ent, got caught in a spray of some liquid fire and burned like a
torch: a horrible sight. 'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before;
but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was staggering. They
roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the
mere noise of them. Merry and I lay on the ground and stuffed our cloaks
into our ears. Round and round the rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding
and storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars, hurling avalanches of
boulders down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like
leaves. The tower was in the middle of a spinning whirlwind. I saw iron
posts and blocks of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet, and smash
against the windows of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. lie had not had
any burns, luckily. He did not want his folk to hurt themselves in their
fury, and he did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole in the
confusion. Many of the Ents were hurling themselves against the
Orthanc -rock; but that defeated them. It is very smooth and hard. Some
wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than Saruman’s. Anyway they
could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and they were bruising
and wounding themselves against it. ’So Treebeard went out into the ring and
shouted. His enormous voice rose above all the din. There was a dead
silence, suddenly. In it we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the
tower. That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now
they became cold, grim as ice, and quiet. They left the plain and gathered
round Treebeard, standing quite still. He spoke to them for a little in
their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his
old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in the grey light. Day was dawning by that time. 'They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were so
well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see them. The
others went away north. All that day they were busy, out of sight. Most of
the time we were left alone. It was a dreary day; and we wandered about a
bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time we spent
looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was
happening away south in Rohan, and what had become of all the rest of our
Company. Every now and then we could hear in the distance the rattle and
fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills. ’In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a look
at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of Huorns at the head
of the valley, and another round the northern wall. We did not dare to go
in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and
Huorns were digging great pits and trenches, and making great pools and
dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream
that they could find. We left them to it. 'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and booming to
himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his great arms and legs
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired. ' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a
good draught of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more
stone -cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long
year before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not linger near this
gate or in the old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be foul water
for a while, until all the filth of Saruman is washed away. Then Isen can
run clean again." He began to pull down a bit more of the walls, in a
leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself. 'We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get some
sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a
rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly a great horse came striding
up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark, but I could see the rider's
face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat
up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't. 'There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us.
'Gandalf!' I said at last, but my voice was only a whisper. Did he say: "Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up,
you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in all this ruin is
Treebeard? I want him. Quick!" ’Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and
there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed
surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here; and
Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose
to meet him. Yet we had told the old Entail about Moria. But then I
remembered a queer look he gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he
had seen Gandalf or had some news of him, but would not say anything in a
hurry. "Don’t be hasty" is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say
much about Gandalf s movements when he is not there. '"Hoorn! Gandalf!" said Treebeard. "I am glad you have come. Wood and
water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here." '"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much, but
I need more. I have about ten thousand Ores to manage." 'Then those two went off and had a council together in some corner. It
must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous
hurry, and was already talking at a great pace, before they passed out of
hearing. They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps a quarter of an
hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He
did say he was glad to see us, then. "'But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you been? And have you seen the
others?" "'Wherever I have been, I am back," he answered in the genuine Gandalf
manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait. This is a
perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if
so, we shall meet again. Take care of yourselves, and keep away from
Orthanc! Good-bye!" 'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently
learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said: "Hm, well, I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought. You said much
less than you might, and not more than you should. Hm, this is a bundle of
news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again." 'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not cheer
us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about
Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great
battle going on, or soon would be, and that you were in it, and might never
come out of it.
'"Huorns will help," said Treebeard. Then he went away and we did not
see him again until this morning. 'It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see
nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great
blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full of
rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle.
Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south, and flashes of
lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then we could see
mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out suddenly, black and white,
and then vanish. And behind us there were noises like thunder in hills, but
different. At times the whole valley echoed. 'It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams and
poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into
Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thunder had rolled away. The
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains. 'Isengard began to fill up with black creeping streams and pools. They
glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into some shaft or
spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows. There were
explosions and gusts of fire. One great coil of vapour went whirling up,
twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud,
fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at
last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.' 'We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night when we
came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman
was brewing some new devilry for us.' 'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably choking and not laughing any
more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk down into all
the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over
there; and we had rather a fright. The lake began to overflow and pour out
through the old tunnel, and the water was rapidly rising up the steps. We
thought we were going to get caught like Ores in a hole; but we found a
winding stair at the back of the store-room that brought us out on top of
the arch. It was a squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and
half blocked with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the
floods and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in
more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs
slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella of cloud: it
must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a great rainbow over
the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on
the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully,
far away. The Ents stopped the inflow in the night, and sent the Isen back
into its old course. And that was the end of it all. ’Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of
his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We felt very lonely. Not
even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and no news. We spent the
night up on top there above the arch, and it was cold and damp and we did
not sleep. We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute.
Saruman is still in his tower. There was a noise in the night like a wind
coming up the valley. I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came
back then; but where they have all gone to now, I don't know. It was a
misty, moisty morning when we climbed down and looked round again,
and nobody was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost
peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since Gandalf
came back. I could sleep!' They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is
one thing I wonder about,' he said as he lit it with his flint and tinder:
'Wormtongue. You told Thjoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?' 'Oh yes, I forgot about him,' said Pippin. 'He did not get here till
this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard
appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside. "'I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,' he said; 'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well
indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his thighs. "No more Ores in Isengard, no
more axes! And there will be folk coming up from the South before the day is
old; some that you may be glad to see." 'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared, half expecting to
see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head of an army. But out of
the mist there rode a man on an old tired horse; and he looked a queer
twisted sort of creature himself. There was no one else. When he came, out
of the mist and suddenly saw all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he
sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he
did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to
turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put out
a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror,
and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor
of the king, and had been sent with important messages from Thjoden to
Saruman. '"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul
Ores," he said, "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am
hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves." 'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself
"liar". Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for several minutes,
till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha,
hm, I was expecting you, Master Wormtongue." The man started at that name.
"Gandalf got here first. So I know as much about you as I need, and I know
what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of." '"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way." "'You knew the way, I don't doubt," said Treebeard. "But things have
changed here a little. Go and see!" 'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close
behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the floods that lay
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us. "'Let me go away!" he whined. "Let me go away! My messages are useless
now." "'They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two choices: to
stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to cross the water.
Which will you have?" 'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the
water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said. "'The water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty, but that will
not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!" 'With that the wretch floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly
to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of
him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood. But Treebeard waded
after him, and watched his progress. '"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw him crawling
up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the tower still: a
hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I hope the welcome is
to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself clean of the slime. I'll be
away up on the north side, if anyone wants to see me. There is no clean
water down here fit for an Ent to drink, or to bathe in. So I will ask you
two lads to keep a watch at the gate for the folk that are coming. There’ll
be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well
as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Ores. Maybe, you
know the right fashion of Men's words for such a lord, better than Ents. There have been many lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never
learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting man-food, and you
know all about that, I guess. So find what you think is fit for a king to
eat, if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to
know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?' 'He was,' said Aragorn; 'and also Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the ruin of
all that he thought so strong and magnificent must have been almost
punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.' 'Yes, I don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness,'
said Merry. 'He seemed rather grimly delighted with the business and was
laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy
time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or
three store-rooms in different places nearby, above the flood-level. But
Treebeard sent some Ents down, and they carried off a great deal of the
stuff. "'We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that
somebody had counted your company carefully before you arrived. You three
were evidently meant to go with the great people. But you would not have
fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because
we sent no drink. "'What about drink?" I said to the Ents. "'There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents
and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their
draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling
when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we
did not grumble — our labours had been well rewarded. It was through our
search for man-food that Pippin discovered the prize of all the flotsam,
those Hornblower barrels. "Pipe-weed is better after food," said Pippin;
that is how the situation arose.' 'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli. 'All except one thing,' said Aragorn: 'leaf from the Southfarthing in
Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never
been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I know well the
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk
have passed that way for many a long year, not openly. Saruman had secret
dealings with someone in the Shire, I guess. Wormtongues may be found in
other houses than King Thjoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?' 'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.' 'Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is
beyond our reach at present,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it
to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.' 'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any rate, Strider,
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'
Chapter 10. The Voice of Saruman They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of stones,
gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in
the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had now nearly all
subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained, covered with scum and
wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a wilderness of slime
and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and dotted with posts and
pillars leaning drunkenly this way and that. At the rim of the shattered
bowl there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great
storm; and beyond them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long
ravine between the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw
riders picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already
they were drawing near to Orthanc. There is Gandalf, and Thjoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let us go
and meet them!' 'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose slabs that may tilt up and
throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.' They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc,
going slowly, for the flag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders,
seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and waited for
them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them. 'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and made
a few plans,' he said; 'and we have all had some much-needed rest. Now we
must be going on again. I hope you companions have all rested, too, and
refreshed yourselves?' 'We have,' said Merry. 'But our discussions began and ended in smoke.
Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.' 'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf. 'Well, I do not. I have now a last task
to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous, and
probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish may come with
me — but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.' 'I will come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and learn if he really
looks like you.' 'And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?' said Gandalf. 'Saruman
could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are
you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see,
perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before many different eyes
together. But I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight,
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.' ’What's the danger?’ asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at us, and pour fire
out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?' 'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,'
said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do
not guess. Beware of his voice!' They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp edges as
though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings, and small flake-like
splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury of the
Ents. On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door,
high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window, opening upon a
balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted
a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn by some unknown art of the same
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower; but many tall windows
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns. At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go
up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.' 'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any
more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much wrong.
Jomer shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.' 'As you will,' said Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall come with me. Let the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if
there is anything to hear or see.' 'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.' 'Come then!' said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps, and
Thjoden went beside him. The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side of
the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what might
befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step, feeling both
unimportant and unsafe. 'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin. 'I wish I
could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are
not wanted.' Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff. It rang with a hollow sound. 'Saruman, Saruman!' he cried in a loud
commanding voice. 'Saruman come forth!' For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the door
was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening. 'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?' Thjoden started. 'I know that voice,' he said, 'and I curse the day
when I first listened to it.' 'Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Grnma
Wormtongue!' said Gandalf. 'And do not waste our time!' The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke, low and
melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who listened unwarily to
that voice could seldom report the words that they heard; and if they did,
they wondered, for little power remained in them. Mostly they remembered
only that it was a delight to hear the voice speaking, all that it said
seemed wise and reasonable, and desire awoke in them by swift agreement to
seem wise themselves. When others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth
by contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of
those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke
to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through
a juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound of the voice
alone was enough to hold them enthralled; but for those whom it conquered
the spell endured when they were far away, and ever they heard that soft
voice whispering and urging them. But none were unmoved; none rejected its
pleas and its commands without an effort of mind and will, so long as its
master had control of it. 'Well?' it said now with gentle question. 'Why must you disturb my
rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day?' Its tone was that
of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved. They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming;
and they saw a figure standing at the rail, looking down upon them: an old
man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for
it changed if they moved their eyes or if he stirred. His face was long,
with a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the
look that they now bore was grave and benevolent, and a little weary. His
hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his lips
and ears. 'Like, and yet unlike,’ muttered Gimli. 'But come now,' said the soft voice. 'Two at least of you I know by
name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks help or
counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord of the Mark of Rohan are declared by
your noble devices, and still more by the fair countenance of the House of
Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice-renowned! Why have you not
come before, and as a friend? Much have I desired to see you, mightiest king of
western lands, and especially in these latter years, to save you from the
unwise and evil counsels that beset you ! Is it yet too late? Despite the
injuries that have been done to me, in which the men of Rohan, alas! have
had some part, still I would save you, and deliver you from the ruin that
draws nigh inevitably, if you ride upon this road which you have taken.
Indeed I alone can aid you now.' Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked
up at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and
then to Gandalf at his side; and he seemed to hesitate. Gandalf made no
sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that
has not yet come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval of
the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent, as men spell-bound. It
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and fittingly to their
lord. Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with Thjoden. And over
their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark
in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside
a door of escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through.
There was a heavy silence. It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard
stand on their heads,' he growled, gripping the handle of his axe. 'In the
language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means slaying, that is
plain. But we do not come here to beg.'
’Peace!' said Saruman, and for a fleeting moment his voice was less
suave, and a light flickered in his eyes and was gone. 'I do not speak to
you yet, Gimli Gluin's son,' he said. ’Far away is your home and small
concern of yours are the troubles of this land. But it was not by design of
your own that you became embroiled in them, and so I will not blame such
part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me
first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend. ’What have you to say, Thjoden King? Will you have peace with me, and
all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can bring? Shall we
make our counsels together against evil days, and repair our injuries with
such good will that our estates shall both come to fairer flower than ever
before?' Still Thjoden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or doubt
none could say. Jomer spoke. 'Lord, hear me!' he said. 'Now we feel the peril that we were warned
of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed by an old
liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the
hounds, if he could. What aid can he give to you, forsooth? All he desires
is to escape from his plight. But will you parley with this dealer in
treachery and murder? Remember Thjodred at the Fords, and the grave of
Hbma in Helm's Deep!' 'If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young
serpent?' said Saruman, and the flash of his anger was now plain to see. 'But come, Jomer, Jomund's son!' he went on in his soft voice again. To
every man h part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby.
Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies
which you do not understand. But maybe, if you become a king, you Will find
that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the
power of Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real
or fancied, may lie behind. You have won a battle but not a war and that
with help on which you cannot count again. You may find the Shadow of the
Wood at your own door next: it is wayward, and senseless, and has no love
for Men. 'But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant
men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I did not
desire it, then men will be slain. But if I am a murderer on that account,
then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many
wars, and assailed many who defied them. Yet with some they have afterwards
made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King: shall we
have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command ' 'We will have peace,' said Thjoden at last thickly and with an effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Thjoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we
will have peace,' he said, now in a clear voice, 'we will have peace, when
you and all your works have perished — and the works of your dark master to
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's
hearts. You hold out your hand to me, and I perceive only a finger of the
claw of Mordor. Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just as it was
not, for were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and
mine for your own profit as you desired — even so, what will you say of
your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there? And they
hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows, I
will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for the House of Eorl. A
lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.' The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled out of a dream. Harsh
as an old raven's their master's voice sounded in their ears after the music
of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned
over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike. 'Gibbets and crows!' he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous
change. 'Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where
brigands drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the floor among the
dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,
slow in the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his
voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the
patience to speak to you. For I need you not, nor your little band of
gallopers, as swift to fly as to advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I
offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again,
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts! 'But you, Gandalf ! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your
shame. How comes it that you can endure such company? For you are proud,
Gandalf-and not without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both
deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?' Gandalf stirred, and looked up. ’What have you to say that you did not
say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?' Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured
to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely listened. You are proud
and do not love advice, having indeed a store of your own wisdom. But on
that occasion you erred, I think, misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I
fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I
regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you
return to me in the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I?
Are we not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in
Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still
accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world. Let us understand
one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let them wait on
our decisions ! For the common good I am willing to redress the past, and to
receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?' So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort that
none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spell was wholly
different. They heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly king with an
erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a door
to words not meant for them: ill-mannered children or stupid servants
overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders, and wondering how it
would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these two were made: reverend and
wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend
into the tower, to discuss deep things beyond their comprehension in the
high chambers of Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would be left
outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of
Thjoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray us;
he will go — we shall be lost.' Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke. 'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still laughing. 'Saruman, you missed
your path in life. You should have been the king's jester and earned your
bread, and stripes too, by mimicking his counsellors. Ah me!' he paused,
getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond
your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too well. I keep a
clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I
visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay,
the guest who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes
back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen,
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less
strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other things in which you
still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to
new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?' A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before
he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish of a mind in
doubt, loathing to stay and dreading to leave its refuge. For a second he
hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke, and his voice was shrill and
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him. 'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to
speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you w ell enough here. I am no fool,
and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They do not stand openly on my stairs, but
I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.' 'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered Gandalf wearily. 'But
you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as
you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect
you. I am giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free — if you
choose.' 'That sounds well,' sneered Saruman. 'Very much in the manner of
Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not doubt that
you would find Orthanc commodious, and my departure convenient. But
why should I wish to leave? And what do you mean by 'free'? There are
conditions, I presume?' 'Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows.' answered Gandalf.
'Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are destroyed and
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you have cheated
your new master, or tried to do so. When his eye turns hither, it will be
the red eye of wrath. But when I say 'free', I mean 'free': free from bond,
of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if
you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your
staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you
merit them.' Saruman's face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was
kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. 'Later!' he cried, and his voice
rose to a scream. 'Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys ofBarad-dyr
itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings, and the rods of the Five
Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots many sizes larger than
those that you wear now. A modest plan. Hardly one in which my help is
needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat
with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are
sober! And leave behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your
tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony. 'Come back, Saruman!' said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To the
amazement of the others, Saruman turned again, and as if dragged against his
will, he came slowly back to the iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. His face was lined and shrunken. His hand clutched his heavy black staff
like a claw. 'I did not give you leave to go,' said Gandalf sternly. 'I have not
finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still
have turned away from folly and evil, and have been of service. But you
choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then! But I warn
you. you will not easily come out again. Not unless the dark hands of the
East stretch out to take you. Saruman!' he cried, and his voice grew in
power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed.
I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour
now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.' He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice. 'Saruman,
your staff is broken.' There was a crack, and the staff split asunder in
Saruman's hand, and the head of it fell down at Gandalf s feet. 'Go!' said
Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a
heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off the iron
rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf 's head, it smote
the stair on which he stood. The rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked
and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on
down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a heart of fire. As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.
'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer. But Gandalf was unmoved. No, that
was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came
from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy,
but ill aimed.' 'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his mind which
he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn. 'That may be so,' said Gandalf. 'Small comfort will those two have in
their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words. But the
punishment is just. If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive, it will
be more than he deserves. 'Here, my lad, I'll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,' he
cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if
he were bearing a great weight. He went down to meet him and hastily took
the dark globe from the hobbit, wrapping it in the folds of his cloak. 'I
will take care of this,' he said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman
would have chosen to cast away.' 'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end
of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!' 'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.' They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down. The
riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spell of Saruman
was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed. 'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell
him how things have gone.' 'He will have guessed, surely?' said Merry. 'Were they likely to end
any other way?' 'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though they came to the balance of a
hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less so. First
Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning. He cannot be
both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims piece-meal,
while others listened. Then I gave him a last choice and a fair one: to
renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping
us in our need. He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have
rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc.
He will not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of
Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will
be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We
cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron — who knows what he can
do?' 'And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked
Pippin. 'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing to him. I do not wish
for mastery. What w ill become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so much
that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have not gone
badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I
guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.' A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above. 'It seems that Saruman thinks so too,' said Gandalf. 'Let us leave
them!' They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed out
under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where they
had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder. 'Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I have
spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one. The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to them in
turn. Last he turned to Legolas. 'So you have come all the way from
Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!' 'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there
ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's
Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did not wish to turn
back.' Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish,
ere the hills be much older,' he said. 'I will come, if I have the fortune,' said Legolas. 'I have made a
bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn
together — by your leave.' 'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard. 'The friend I speak of is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I mean Gimli,
Gluin's son here.' Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his belt and
clattered on the ground. 'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. A dwarf
and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but you ask much. This
is a strange friendship!' ’Strange it may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while
Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but
for ore-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's Wood. Forty -two he hewed in
the battle.' 'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard. 'That is a better story! Well, well,
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But
now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you
must go ere nightfall, and the Ford of the Mark is eager for his own house.' 'Yes, we must go, and go now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.' 'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty — growing
backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the first new thing
under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long, long day. I shall not
forget them. I have put their names into the Fong Fist. Ents will remember
it. Ents the earthborn, old as mountains, the wide-walkers, water drinking; and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, the laughing-folk, the little people, they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire, send me word!
You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if
you
can!' 'We will!' said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away
hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking his
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf. 'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did not think he would. His
heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if I were overcome and all my
trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark hole left to hide
in.' 'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you have not plotted to cover all the world
with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it is, Saruman
remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can. He has the
Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.' 'Indeed no! Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not
set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.’ 'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to
other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The waters have
gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I
do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and that
Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. If you will undertake
the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard
remains a standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the
underground places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must
stay upstairs and look out of the windows.' 'Leave it to the Ents!’ said Treebeard. 'We shall search the valley
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live
here, old trees, wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel
will go here, but I shall know of it. Leave it to Ents ! Until seven times
the years in which he tormented us have passed, we shall not tire of
watching him.'
Chapter 11. The Palantnr The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains when
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of
the king's men went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace. Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long
arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looked back, when
they had passed some way down the winding road. Sunlight was still shining
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey ruins falling into
darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the distant stump of an old
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon the sunny ledge far
away on the borders of Fangorn. They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still
standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken into small
pieces. Right in the middle of the road the long forefinger lay, white in
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black. 'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf. They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. 'Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?' asked Merry after a while. 'I
don't know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but the
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.' 'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort
to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in
his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and
why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if so, how you escaped
when all the Ores perished — it is with those little riddles that the great
mind ^ Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if
you feel honoured by his concern.' 'Thank you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a
question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?' Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a
hobbit or two in their care — to teach them the meaning of the word, and to
correct them. I beg your pardon. But I have given thought even to these
simple matters. We will ride for a few hours, gently, until we come to the
end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster. ’When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's
house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But we have taken
thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's Deep, to
warn them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than
two or three together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it
can be avoided.' 'Nothing or a double helping is your way!' said Merry. 'I am afraid I
was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.' 'Then you'd best learn something, if you wish to understand what is
happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many pressing
things to think about.' 'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less testy. But
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!' Yes, we have won, but only the first victor and that in itself
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor,
which I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did
so. The Eye of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards the Wizard's
Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.' The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now further, and now
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All
the mists were gone. A chill wind blew. The moon, now waxing round, filled
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen. The shoulders of the mountain to
their right sloped down to bare hills. The wide plains opened grey before
them. At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the highway and
taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came
to a dale. It opened southward, leaning back into the slope of round Dol
Baran, the last hill of the northern ranges, greenfooted, crowned with
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last year's bracken, among
which the tight-curled fronds of spring were just thrusting through the
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks, and under
them they made their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night.
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of a spreading hawthorn,
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling
at each twig's tip. Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped,
wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits lay in a
corner by themselves upon a pile of old bracken. Merry was sleepy, but
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he
twisted and turned. 'What’s the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?' 'No,' said Pippin, 'but I'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it is
since I slept in a bed?' Merry yawned. 'Work it out on your fingers!' he said. 'But you must
know how long it is since we left Lurien.' 'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.' 'Well, Rivendell then,' said Merry. 'But I could sleep anywhere
tonight.' 'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You
were riding with Gandalf.' 'Well, what of it?' 'Did you get any news, any information out of him?' 'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it:
you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you can go with him
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.' 'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.' 'Oh yes, he is!' said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning to
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He
can be both kinder and more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I
think. He has changed; but we have not had a chance to see how much, yet.
But think of the last part of that business with Saruman! Remember Saruman
was once Gandalf s superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be
exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman
came when he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go,
and he went!' 'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's
all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass ball, now. He seemed mighty pleased with
it. He knows or guesses something about it. But does he tell us what? No,
not a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved it from rolling into a pool. Here, I'll take that, my lad — that's all. I wonder what it is? It felt so
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to himself. 'Hullo!' said Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin my
lad, don't forget Gildor's saying — the one Sam used to quote: Do not
meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.' 'But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the
affairs of Wizards,' said Pippin. 'I should like a bit of information as
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.' 'Go to sleep!' said Merry. 'You'll get information enough, sooner or
later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;
but is this the time, I ask you?' 'All right! What's the harm in my telling you what I should like: a
look at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Gandalf sitting on it,
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you than
a you-can 't-have-it so -go -to -sleep ! ' 'Well, what else could I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you
really must wait till the morning. I'll be as curious as you like after
breakfast, and I'll help in any way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't
keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good
night!' Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and
it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a
few minutes after saying good night. 'The thought of the dark globe seemed
to grow stronger as all grew quiet. Pippin felt again its weight in his
hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had looked for
a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else. At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was
chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. The moon was shining cold and
white, down into the dell, and the shadows of the bushes were black. All
about lay sleeping shapes. The two guards were not in view: they were up on
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some impulse that he
did not understand, Pippin walked softly to where Gandalf lay. He looked
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there
was a glitter of eyes under his long lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. But Gandalf made no sign; and drawn forward once more, half against his
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled
in a blanket, with his cloak spread over the top; and close beside him,
between his right side and his bent arm, there was a hummock, something
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off
it to the ground. Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last he knelt
down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and slowly lifted the lump up:
it did not seem quite so heavy as he had expected. 'Only some bundle of
oddments, perhaps, after all,' he thought with a strange sense of relief;
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it.
Then an idea came into his mind. He tiptoed away, found a large stone, and
came back. Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed to be in a strange
tongue; his hand groped out and clasped the wrapped stone, then he sighed
and did not move again. 'You idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered to himself. 'You're going to get
yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quick!' But he found now that
his knees quaked, and he did not dare to go near enough to the wizard to
reach the bundle. 'I'll never get it back now without waking him,' he
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. S0I may as well have a look first. Not
just here though!' He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not far
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell. Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between them. He bent
low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping over a bowl of food, in a
corner away from others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at it. The air
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet,
with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then there came a faint glow and
stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look
away. Soon all the inside seemed on fire; the ball was spinning, or the
lights within were revolving. Suddenly the lights went out. He gave a gasp
and struggled; but he remained bent, clasping the ball with both hands.
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still. The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the banks. All the
camp was soon astir. ’So this is the thief!' said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak over
the globe where it lay. ’But you, Pippin! This is a grievous turn to
things!’ He knelt by Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid,
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he
done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard. He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath;
then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed.
He cried out; and sat up. staring in bewilderment at all the faces round
him, pale in the moonlight. 'It is not for you, Saruman!' he cried in a shrill and toneless voice
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held him
gently and firmly. 'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!' The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard's hand.
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!' 'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!' 'I, I took the ball and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then
he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and, and that is all I
remember.' 'That won't do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did
you say?' Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at
him in silence, except Merry who turned away. But Gandalf s face was still
hard. 'Speak!' he said. In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew
clearer and stronger. 'I saw a dark sky, and tall battlements,' he said.
'And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and clear.
Then the stars went in and out-they were cut off by things with wings. Very
big, I think, really; but in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round
the tower. I thought there were nine of them. One began to fly straight
towards me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible — no, no! I can't
say. 'I tried to get away, because I thought it would fly out; but when it
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood. "'So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?" 'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer, but
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit." 'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he said: "Wait a
moment! We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman that this dainty is not for
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!" 'Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. No, no! I
can't say any more. I don't remember anything else.' 'Look at me!' said Gandalf. Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a
moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, and the shadow of a smile
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head. 'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not speak long with you. A fool,
but an honest fool, you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might have done
worse in such a pass. But mark this! You have been saved, and all your
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it
a second time. If he had questioned you, then and there, almost certainly
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you, quickly, so that he
could deal with you in the Dark Tower, slowly. Don't shudder! If you will
meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of such
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as
evilly as they might.' He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. Merry
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can, Pippin!'
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of
it! Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put a lump
of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will leave you two together for a
while.' With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still standing by
the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least
expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!' 'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn. 'I think all will be well now,' answered Gandalf. 'He was not held
long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory, or the
horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps. Will you,
Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.' 'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may
claim it by right. For this assuredly is the palantnr of Orthanc from the
treasury of Elendil, set here by the Kings of Gondor. Now my hour draws
near. I will take it.' Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he
lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it. 'Receive it, lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of your own, do not use it
— yet! Be wary!' 'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and prepared for so
many long years?' said Aragorn. 'Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,' answered
Gandalf. 'But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that
stand here ! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know where it is
bestowed. The evil fit may come on him again. For alas ! he has handled it
and looked in it, as should never have happened. He ought never to have
touched it in Isengard, and there I should have been quicker. But my mind
was bent on Saruman, and I did not at once guess the nature of the Stone.
Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!' 'Yes, there can be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link'
between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange
powers have our enemies, and strange weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has
long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.' 'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been
strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit from a grave
blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find
its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not
ready for such a trial, if indeed I shall ever be so: But even if I found
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet
— until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.' 'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn. 'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone was in Orthanc —
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit was captive there, driven
to look in the glass for his torment by Saruman. That dark mind will be
filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it
may take some time before he learns his error. We must snatch that time. We
have been too leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no
place now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.' 'I will keep Jomer and ten Riders,' said the king. 'They shall ride
with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they
have a mind.' 'As you will,' said Gandalf. 'But make all the speed you may to the
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!' At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to
be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding
their arms above their heads, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind
fear and a deadly cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged
shape passed over the moon like a black cloud. It wheeled and went north,
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle -earth. The stars fainted
before it. It was gone. They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. 'Nazgyl!' he cried. 'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The
Nazgyl have crossed the River! Ride, ride! Wait not for the dawn! Let not
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!' He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn followed him.
Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me
this time,' he said. 'Shadowfax shall show you his paces.' Then he ran to
the place where he had slept. Shadowfax stood there already. Slinging the
small bag which was all his luggage across his shoulders, the wizard leapt
upon the horse's back. Aragorn lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf s arms,
, wrapped in cloak and blanket. ’Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!' The great horse tossed his head. His flowing tail flicked in the
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, and was gone like the
north wind from the mountains. 'A beautiful, restful night!' said Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk have
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf
— and there he goes ! Instead of being turned into a stone himself to stand
here for ever as a warning.' 'If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he, how
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say?
But now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At once. Go and get ready, and
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!' Over the plains Shadowfax was flying, needing no urging and no
guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they had reached the Fords of
Isen and crossed them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey
behind them. Pippin was recovering. He was warm, but the wind in his face was keen
and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The horror of the stone and of the
hideous shadow over the moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 'I did not know you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You haven't a
saddle or a bridle!' 'I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf. 'But
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax: he is willing to
carry you-or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It is then his business
to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.' 'How fast is he going?' asked Pippin. 'Fast by the wind, but very
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!' 'He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,'
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little
here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White
Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks
like black spears. It will not be long before we reach the branching roads
and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.' Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to
himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught
the words: a few lines came clear to his ears through the rushing of the
wind: Tall ships and tall kings Three times three, What brought they from the foundered land Over the flowing sea? Seven stars and seven stones And one white tree. ’What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin. 'I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind '
answered the wizard. 'Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them, even those
that they ever knew.' 'No, not all,' said Pippin. 'And we have many of our own, which
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What is it
about — the seven stars and seven stones?' 'About the palantnri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf. 'And what are they?' 'The name meant that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.' 'Then it was not made, not made' — Pippin hesitated — 'by the Enemy?' 'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by Saruman. It is beyond his art, and beyond
Sauron's too. The palantnri came from beyond Westernesse from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Flanor himself, maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is nothing that Sauron
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for Saruman! It was his downfall, as I now
perceive. Perilous to us all are the devices of an art deeper than we
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for
his own profit. No word did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We
had not yet given thought to the fate of the palantnri of Gondor in its
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in Gondor they were a
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of
lore among the D®nedain.' 'What did the Men of old use them for?' asked Pippin, delighted and
astonished at getting answers to so many questions, and wondering how long
it would last.
To see far off, and to converse in thought with one another,' said
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They
set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring
of Isengard. The chief and master of these was under the Dome of Stars at
Osgiliath before its ruin. The three others were far away in the North. In
the house of Elrond it is told that they were at Ann®minas, and Amon Syl,
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie. 'Each palantnr replied to each, but all those in Gondor were ever open
to the view of Osgiliath. Now it appears that, as the rock of Orthanc has
withstood the storms of time, so there the palantnr of that tower has
remained. But alone it could do nothing but see small images of things far
off and days remote. Very useful, no doubt, that was to Saruman; yet it
seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until he
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught! 'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or
drowned deep? But one. at least Sauron must have obtained and mastered to
his purposes. I guess that it was the Ithil-stone, for he took Minas Ithil
long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. 'Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of Saruman was
trapped and held; and how ever since he has been persuaded from afar, and
daunted when persuasion would not serve. The biter bit, the hawk under the
eagle's foot, the spider in a steel web! How long, I wonder, has he been
constrained to come often to his glass for inspection and instruction, and
the Orthanc -stone so bent towards Barad-dyr that, if any save a will of
adamant now looks into it, it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? And how it draws one to itself! Have I not felt it? Even now my heart
desires to test my will upon it, to see if I could not wrench it from him
and turn it where I would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time
to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at
their work, while both the White Tree and the Golden were in flower!' He
sighed and fell silent. 'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had no notion of
what I was doing.' 'Oh yes, you had,' said Gandalf. 'You knew you were behaving wrongly
and foolishly; and you told yourself so, though you did not listen. I did
not tell you all this before, because it is only by musing on all that has
happened that I have at last understood, even as we ride together. But if I
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier
to resist. On the contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After that
advice about fire goes to the heart.' 'It does,' said Pippin. 'If all the seven stones were laid out before
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.' 'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.' 'But I should like to know—' Pippin began. 'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my days in answering
you. What more do you want to know?' 'The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole
history of Middle-earth and Over -heaven and of the Sundering Seas ' laughed
Pippin. 'Of course! What less? But I am notin a hurry tonight. At the
moment I was just wondering about the black shadow. I heard you shout
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?' 'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have
taken you away to the Dark Tower.' 'But it was not coming for me, was it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it
didn't know that I had... ' 'Of course not,' said Gandalf. 'It is two hundred leagues or more in
straight flight from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl would take a
few hours to fly between them. But Saruman certainly looked in the Stone
since the ore-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been
read than he intended. A messenger has been sent to find out what he is
doing. And after what has happened tonight another will come, I think, and
swiftly. So Saruman will come to the last pinch of the vice that he has put
his hand in. He has no captive to send. He has no Stone to see with, and
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will only believe that he is withholding
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not help Saruman to tell
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe
in Orthanc. So whether he will or no, he will appear a rebel. Yet he
rejected us, so as to avoid that very thing! What he will do in such a
plight, I cannot guess. He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap the Nazgyl,
or at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the air. In that case
let Rohan look to its horses !
'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may be
that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused, or hindered by his wrath
with Saruman. It may be that he will learn that I was there and stood upon
the stairs of Orthanc-with hobbits at my tail. Or that an heir of Elendil
lives and stood beside me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the armour of
Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what
I fear. And so we fly — not from danger but into greater danger. Every
stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.' Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had
struck him. Grey land passed under them. 'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales are opening before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow yonder is the
mouth of the Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves. Do
not ask me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time
you may get an answer longer than you wish. You will not see the caves
yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.' 'I thought you were going to stop at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where
are you going then?' 'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.' 'Oh! And how far is that?' 'Leagues upon leagues,' answered Gandalf. 'Thrice as far as the
dwellings of King Thjoden, and they are more than a hundred miles east from
here, as the messengers of Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run a longer road.
Which will prove the swifter? 'We shall ride now till daybreak, and that is some hours away. Then
even Shadowfax must rest, in some hollow of the hills: at Edoras, I hope.
Sleep, if you can! You may see the first glimmer of dawn upon the golden
roof of the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the purple
shadow of Mount Mindolluin and the walls of the tower of Denethor white in
the morning. 'Away now, Shadowfax! Run, greatheart, run as you have never run
before! Now we are come to the lands where you were foaled and every stone
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!' Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed
over him.
As he fell slowly into sleep, Pippin had a strange feeling: he and
Gandalf were still as stone, seated upon the statue of a running horse,
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind.
* BOOK IV * Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol 'Well, master, we’re in a fix and no mistake,' said Sam Gamgee. He
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out with
puckered eyes into the gloom. It was the third evening since they had fled from the Company, as far
as they could tell: they had almost lost count of the hours during which
they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the
Emyn Muil, sometimes retracing their steps because they could find no way
forward, sometimes discovering that they had wandered in a circle back to
where they had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily
eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this
strange twisted knot of hills. But always they found its outward faces
sheer, high and impassable, frowning over the plain below; beyond its
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not even
a bird was to be seen. The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its
feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with
drifting cloud. A chill wind' blew from the East. Night was gathering over
the shapeless lands before them; the sickly green of them was fading to a
sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in
sun-breaks during the day, was now hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not
look beyond the River, back to Gondor, to their friends, to the lands of
Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,
a dark line hung, like distant mountains of motionless smoke. Every now and
again a tiny red gleam far away flickered upwards on the rim of earth and
sky. 'What a fix! ' said Sam. 'That's the one place in all the lands we've
ever heard of that we don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place
we're trying to get to! And that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've
come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down; and if we did
get down, we’d find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind. ’Yes, I can smell it,' said Frodo, but he did not move, and his eyes
remained fixed, staring out towards the dark line and the flickering flame.
'Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I must go there I wish I could
come there quickly and make an end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay. 'Well,' he said, at last withdrawing
his eyes, 'we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more
sheltered spot, and camp once more; and perhaps another day will show us a
path.’ 'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam. 'Or maybe no day.
We've come the wrong way.' 'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my doom, I think, to go to that Shadow
yonder, so that a way will be found. But will good or evil show it to me? What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices
have proved ill. I should have left the Company long before, and come down
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard
of Battle Plain to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible for you
and me alone to find a way back, and the Ores are prowling on the east bank.
Every day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know
what is to be done. What food have we got left?' 'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug — aye, half a mug — of beer would
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last camp,
and what use has it been? Naught to make a fire with, for a start; and
naught to cook, not even grass!' They turned away and went down into a stony hollow. The westering sun
was caught into clouds, and night came swiftly. They slept as well as they
could for the cold, turn and turn about, in a nook among great jagged
pinnacles of weathered rock; at least they were sheltered from the easterly
wind. 'Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo?’ asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and
chilled, munching wafers of lembas , in the cold grey of early morning. 'No,' said Frodo. 'I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights
now.' 'Nor me,' said Sam. 'Grrr! Those eyes did give me a turn! But perhaps
we've shaken him off at last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him
gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.' 'I hope you'll never need to,' said Frodo. 'I don't know how he
followed us; but it may be that he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry
bleak land we can't leave many footprints, nor much scent, even for his
snuffling nose.' 'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him
for good!' 'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we could
get away from these hills ! I hate them. I feel all naked on the east side,
stuck up here with nothing but the dead flats between me and that Shadow
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.' But that day wore on, and when afternoon faded towards evening they
were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape. Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied that they
heard faint sounds behind them, a stone falling, or the imagined step of
flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted and stood still listening,
they heard no more, nothing but the wind sighing over the edges of the
stones — yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp
teeth. All that day the outer ridge of the Emyn Muil had been bending
gradually northward, as they struggled on. Along its brink there now
stretched a wide tumbled flat of scored and weathered rock, cut every now
and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in
the cliff-face. To find a path in these clefts, which were becoming deeper
and more frequent, Frodo and Sam were driven to their left, well away from
the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of
the lowlands. At last they were brought to a halt. The ridge took a sharper bend
northward and was gashed by a deeper ravine. On the further side it reared
up again, many fathoms at a single leap: a great grey cliff loomed before
them, cut sheer down as if by a knife stroke. They could go no further
forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west would lead them
only into more labour and delay, back towards the heart of the hills; east
would take them to the outer precipice. 'There's nothing for it but to scramble down this gully, Sam,' said
Frodo. 'Let's see what it leads to!' 'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam. The cleft was longer and deeper than it seemed. Some way down they
found a few gnarled and stunted trees, the first they had seen for days:
twisted birch for the most part, with here and there a fir-tree. Many were
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty
yards, the trees came to an end, though old broken stumps straggled on
almost to the cliffs brink. The bottom of the gully, which lay along the
edge of a rock-fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply down.
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out. 'Look!' he said. 'We must have come down a long way, or else the cliff
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.' Sam knelt beside him and peered reluctantly over the edge. Then he
glanced up at the great cliff rising up, away on their left. 'Easier! ’ he
grunted. 'Well, I suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as
can't fly can jump!' 'It would be a big jump still,’ said Frodo. 'About, well' — he stood
for a moment measuring it with his eyes — 'about eighteen fathoms I should
guess. Not more.’ 'And that's enough! ' said Sam. 'Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a
height! But looking's better than climbing.' 'All the same,' said Frodo, 'I think we could climb here; and I think
we shall have to try. See — the rock is quite different from what it was a
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.' The outer fall was indeed no longer sheer, but sloped outwards a
little. It looked like a great rampart or sea-wall whose foundations had
shifted, so that its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great
fissures and long slanting edges that were in places almost as wide as
stairs. 'And if we're going to try and get down, we had better try at once. It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.' The smoky blur of the mountains in the East was lost in a deeper
blackness that was already reaching out westwards with long arms. There was
a distant mutter of thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed the
air and looked up doubtfully at the sky. He strapped his belt outside his
cloak and tightened it, and settled his light pack on his back; then he
stepped towards the edge. 'I'm going to try it,' he said. 'Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. 'But I'm going first.' 'You? ' said Frodo. 'What's made you change your mind about climbing?' 'I haven't changed my mind. But it's only sense: put the one lowest as
is most likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you and knock you
off no sense in killing two with one fall.' Before Frodo could stop him, he sat down, swung his legs over the
brink, and twisted round, scrabbling with his toes for a foothold. It is
doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise. 'No, no! Sam, you old ass! ' said Frodo. 'You'll kill yourself for
certain going over like that without even a look to see what to make for.
Come back! ' He took Sam under the armpits and hauled him up again. 'Now,
wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out
and looking down: but the light seemed to be fading quickly, although the
sun had not yet set. 'I think we could manage this,' he said presently. 'I
could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your head and followed me
carefully.' 'I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. 'Why! You can't see to
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere
to put your feet or your hands?' 'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo. 'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.' 'No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm going down to try it out. Don't you
follow till I come back or call!' Gripping the stony lip of the fall with his fingers he let himself
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found
a ledge. 'On_ e step down! ' he said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll—' his words were cut short. The hurrying darkness, now gathering great speed, rushed up from the
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right
overhead. Searing lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of
savage wind, and with it, mingling with its roar, there came a high shrill
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they
fled from Hobbiton, and even there in the woods of the Shire it had frozen
their blood. Out here in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced
them with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands
over his head and ears. He swayed, slipped, and slithered downwards with a
wailing cry. Sam heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! ' he called. ’Master!'. He heard no answer. He found he was shaking all over, but he gathered
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up the gully and away
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears: 'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.' Frodo was calling with a weak voice. ,He was not actually very far
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on
a wider ledge not many yards lower down. Fortunately the rock-face at this
point leaned well back and the wind had pressed him against the cliff, so
that he had not toppled over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face
against the cold stone, feeling his heart pounding. But either the darkness
had grown complete, or else his eyes had lost their sight. All was black
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath. 'Come back! Come back! ' he heard Sam's voice out of the blackness
above. 'I can't,’ he said. 'I can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't move
yet.' 'What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do? ’ shouted Sam, leaning out
dangerously far. Why could not his master see? It was dim, certainly, but
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure
splayed against the cliff. But he was far out of the reach of any helping
hand. There was another crack of thunder; and then the rain came. In a
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold. Tm coming down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in
that way he could not have said. 'No, no! wait! 'Frodo called back, more strongly now. 'I shall be
better soon. I feel better already. Wait! You can't do anything without a
rope.' 'Rope!' cried Sam, talking wildly to himself in his excitement and
relief. 'Well, if I don’t deserve to be hung on the end of one as a warning
to numbskulls! You're nowt but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's what
the Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!' 'Stop chattering!’ cried Frodo, now recovered enough to feel both
amused and annoyed. ’Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself
you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it! 'Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and all. Carried it hundreds of miles and
I'd clean forgotten it!' 'Then get busy and let an end down!’ Quickly Sam unslung his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the
bottom was a coil of the silken-grey rope made by the folk of Lurien. He
cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling
down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point
in the darkness to fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning his weight
forward, he made the end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line
with both hands. Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from
the edge. Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up and threw himself on
the ground. Thunder growled and rumbled in the distance, and the rain was still
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but they did
not find much shelter there. Rills of water began to run down; soon they
grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the stones, and spouted out over
the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof. 'I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said
Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!' 'Better luck if I'd thought of it sooner,' said Sam. 'Maybe you
remember them putting the ropes in the boats, as we started off: in the
elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and I stowed a coil in my pack. Years
ago, it seems. "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of
those folk. And he spoke right.' 'A pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; 'but I
left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only we had enough we
could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?’ Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty,
thirty ells, more or less,' he said. 'Who'd have thought it!' Frodo exclaimed. 'Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. 'Elves are wonderful folk. It looks a bit
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Packs close too, and as
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!' 'Thirty ells! ' said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.' 'The rain's nearly given over already,' said Sam; 'but don't you go
doing anything risky in the dim again, Mr. Frodo! And I haven't got over
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it sounded-but
one up in the air, if they can fly. I'm thinking we'd best lay up in this
crack till night's over.' 'And I'm thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,'
said Frodo. With that he stood up and went down to the bottom of the gully again. He looked out. Clear sky was growing in the East once more. The skirts of
the storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the main battle had passed to
spread its great wings over the Emyn Muil; upon which the dark thought of
Sauron brooded for a while. Thence it turned, smiting the Vale of Anduin
with hail and lightning, and casting its shadow upon Minas Tirith with
threat of war. Then, lowering in the mountains, and gathering its great
spires, it rolled on slowly over Gondor and the skirts of Rohan, until far
away the Riders on the plain saw its black towers moving behind the sun, as
they rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the reeking marshes
the deep blue sky of evening opened once more, and a few pallid stars
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon. 'It's good to be able to see again,' said Frodo, breathing deep. 'Do
you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight? From the lightning
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.' 'It does look sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. 'Never noticed it
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo, how are you going to use
it? Thirty ells, or say, about eighteen fathom: that's no more than your
guess at the height of the cliff.' Frodo thought for a while. 'Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ’ he said.
'Then I think you shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll lower
you, and you need do no more than use your feet and hands to fend yourself
off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on some of the ledges and give
me a rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself
again now.' 'Very well,' said Sam heavily. 'If it must be, let's get it over! ' He
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest to the brink; then
the other end he tied about his own waist. Reluctantly he turned and
prepared to go over the edge a second time. It did not, however, turn out half as bad as he had expected. The rope
seemed to give him confidence, though he shut his eyes more than once when
he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there
was no ledge and the wall was sheer and even undercut for a short space; there
he slipped and swung out on the silver line. But Frodo lowered him slowly
and steadily, and it was over at last. His chief fear had been that the
rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a
good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: 'I'm
down! ' His voice came up clearly from below, but Frodo could not see him;
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight. Frodo took rather more time to follow him. He had the rope about his
waist and it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it would pull
him up before he reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall,
and he had not quite Sam's faith in this slender grey line. He found two
places, all the same, where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces
where there was no hold even for his strong hobbit fingers and the ledges
were far apart. But at last he too was down. 'Well!' he cried. 'We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And
now what next, I wonder? Maybe we shall soon be sighing for good hard rock
under foot again.' But Sam did not answer: he was staring back up the cliff. 'Ninny hammers! ' he said. 'Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a
stump, and we're at the bottom. Just as nice a little stair for that
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.' 'If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet
brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyhammer, or any
other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. 'Climb up and untie it and let
yourself down, if you want to!' Sam scratched his head. 'No, I can't think how, begging your pardon,'
he said. 'But I don't like leaving it, and that's a fact.' He stroked the
rope's end and shook it gently. 'It goes hard parting with anything I
brought out of the Elf-country. Made by Galadriel herself, too, maybe.
Galadriel,' he murmured nodding his head mournfully. He looked up and gave
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell. To the complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam fell
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down on top of him. Frodo
laughed. 'Who tied the rope? ' he said. 'A good thing it held as long as it
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!’ Sam did not laugh. 'I may not be much good at climbing, Mr. Frodo,' he
said in injured tones, 'but I do know something about rope and about knots. It's in the family, as you might say. Why, my grand-dad, and my uncle Andy
after him, him that was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over
by Tighfield many a year. And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as any
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.' 'Then the rope must have broken — frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,'
said Frodo. 'I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an even more injured voice. He stooped
and examined the ends. 'Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!' 'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo. Sam shook his head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through
his fingers thoughtfully. 'Have it your own way, Mr. Frodo,' he said at
last, 'but I think the rope came off itself — when I called.' He coiled it
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack. 'It certainly came,' said Frodo, 'and that's the chief thing. But now
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful
the stars are, and the Moon!' 'They do cheer the heart, don't they? ' said Sam looking up. 'Elvish
they are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't seen him for a night
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.' 'Yes,' said Frodo; 'but he won't be full for some days. I don't think
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.' Under the first shadows of night they started out on the next stage of
their journey. After a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had
come. The mouth of the gully was a black notch in the dim cliff. Tm glad
we’ve got the rope,' he said. 'We’ve set a little puzzle for that footpad,
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!' They picked their steps away from the skirts of the cliff, among a
wilderness of boulders and rough stones, wet and slippery with the heavy
rain. The ground still fell away sharply. They had not gone very far when
they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet.
It was not wide, but it was too wide to jump across in the dim light. They
thought they could hear water gurgling in its depths. It curved away on
their left northward, back towards the hills, and so barred their road in
that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted. 'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I
think,' said Sam. 'We might find some nook there, or even a cave or
something.' 'I suppose so,' said Frodo. Tm tired, and I don't think I can
scramble among stones much longer tonight — though I grudge the delay. I
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave
way.' They did not find the going any easier at the broken feet of the Emyn
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook or hollow to shelter in: only bare stony
slopes frowned over by the cliff, which now rose again, higher and more
sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they just cast themselves on
the ground under the lee of a boulder lying not far from the foot of the
precipice. There for some time they sat huddled mournfully together in the
cold stony night, while sleep crept upon them in spite of all they could do
to hold it off. The moon now rode high and clear. Its thin white light lit
up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff,
turning all the wide looming darkness into a chill pale grey scored with
black shadows. 'Well! ' said Frodo, standing up and drawing his cloak more closely
round him. 'You sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket. I'll walk up and
down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened, and stooping he gripped
Sam by the arm. 'What's that? ' he whispered. 'Look over there on the
cliff!’ Sam looked and breathed in sharply through his teeth. 'Ssss!' he said.
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think that I
thought that we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at him! Like a
nasty crawling spider on a wall.' Down the face of a precipice, sheer and almost smooth it seemed in the
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin limbs splayed
out. Maybe its soft clinging hands and toes were finding crevices and holds
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.
And it was coming down head first, as if it was smelling its way. Now and
again it lifted its head slowly, turning it right back on its long skinny
neck, and the hobbits caught a glimpse of two small pale gleaming lights,
its eyes that blinked at the moon for a moment and then were quickly lidded
again. 'Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam. 'I don't know,' said Frodo quietly, 'but I think not. It is hard even
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot see you in the shadow
even at a few paces. And I've heard that he doesn’t like Sun or Moon.' 'Then why is he coming down just here? ’ asked Sam. 'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. 'He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear
as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices
probably. We did a lot of shouting away back there; and we were talking far
too loudly until a minute ago.' 'Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. 'He's come once too often for me and
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose we could give
him the slip now anyway.' Drawing his grey hood well over his face, Sam
crept stealthily towards the cliff. 'Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind. 'Don't alarm him! He's much
more dangerous than he looks.' The black crawling shape was now three-quarters of the way down, and
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliffs foot. Crouching stone-still in
the shadow of a large boulder the hobbits watched him. He seemed to have
come to a difficult passage or to be troubled about something. They could
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh hiss of breath that
sounded like a curse. He lifted his head, and they thought they heard him
spit. Then he moved on again. Now they could hear his voice creaking and
whistling. 'Ach, sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste less speed. We musstn't
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious — golluml' He lifted his
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. 'We hate it,' he
hissed. 'Nassty, nassty shivery light it is — sss — it spies on us,
precious — it hurts our eyes.' He was getting lower now and the hisses became sharper and clearer.
'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and
we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy little thieves. Where are
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.' 'It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam.
'And what's his Precious? Does he mean the' 'Hsh! ' breathed Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a
whisper.' Indeed Gollum had suddenly paused again, and his large head on its
scrawny neck was lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale
eyes were half unlidded. Sam restrained himself, though his fingers were
twitching. His eyes, filled with anger and disgust, were fixed on the
wretched creature as he now began to move again, still whispering and
hissing to himself. At last he was no more than a dozen feet from the ground, right above
their heads. From that point there was a sheer drop, for the cliff was
slightly undercut, and even Gollum could not find a hold of any kind. He
seemed to be trying to twist round, so as to go legs first, when suddenly
with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and
arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped. Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the space between him
and the cliff foot in a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was
on top of him. But he found Gollum more than he bargained for, even taken
like that, suddenly, off his guard after a fall. Before Sam could get a
hold, long legs and arms were wound round him pinning his arms, and a
clinging grip, soft but horribly strong, was squeezing him like slowly
tightening cords; clammy fingers were feeling for his throat. Then sharp
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head
sideways into the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but he did not
let go. Things would have gone ill with Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo
sprang up, and drew Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back
Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching his long neck, and forcing
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky. 'Let go! Gollum,' he said. 'This is Sting. You have seen it before once
upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.' Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering
his shoulder. His eyes smouldered with anger, but he could not avenge
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering. 'Don't hurt us! Don't let them hurt us, precious! They won't hurt us
will they, nice little hobbitses? We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum.
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be nice to us, won't we, yes,
yess.' 'Well, what’s to be done with it? ' said Sam. 'Tie it up, so as it
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.' 'But that would kill us, kill us,' whimpered Gollum. 'Cruel little
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us, gollum, gollum.'
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat. 'No,' said Frodo. 'If we kill him, we must kill him outright. But we
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.' 'Oh hasn't he! ' said Sam rubbing his shoulder. 'Anyway he meant to,
and he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.' 'I daresay,' said Frodo. 'But what he means to do is another matter.' He paused for a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering.
Sam stood glowering over him. It seemed to Frodo then that he heard, quite plainly but far off,
voices out of the past: What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance! Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike
without need. I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death. Deserves death! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager
to deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even
the wise cannot see all ends. 'Very well,’ he answered aloud, lowering his sword. 'But still I am
afraid. And yet, as you see, I will not touch the creature. For now that I
see him, I do pity him.' Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was
not there. Gollum lifted his head. 'Yess, wretched we are, precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits
won't kill us, nice hobbits.' 'No, we won't,' said Frodo. 'But we won't let you go, either. You're
full of wickedness and mischief, Gollum. You will have to come with us,
that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.' 'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come
with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they
going in these cold hard lands, we wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up
at them, and a faint light of cunning and eagerness flickered for a second
in his pale blinking eyes. Sam scowled at him, and sucked his teeth; but he seemed to sense that
there was something odd about his master's mood and that the matter was
beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply. Frodo looked straight into Gollum's eyes which flinched and twisted
away. 'You know that, or you guess well enough, Smjagol,' he said, quietly
and sternly. 'We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there,
I believe.' 'Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his ears with his hands, as if such
frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. 'We guessed, yes we
guessed,' he whispered; 'and we didn't want them to go, did we? No,
precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;
and pits, pits, pits, and Ores, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go
to — sss — those places.' 'So you have been there? ' Frodo insisted. 'And you're being drawn back
there, aren't you?' 'Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. 'Once, by accident it was, wasn't
it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly
his voice and language changed, and he sobbed in his throat, and spoke but
not to them. 'Leave me alone, golluml You hurt me. O my poor hands, gollum
I, we, I don't want to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't
find it, gollum, gollum, no, nowhere. They're always awake. Dwarves, Men,
and Elves, terrible Elves with bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got
up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards
the East. 'We won't! ' he cried. 'Not for you.' Then he collapsed again.
'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face to the ground. 'Don't look at
us! Go away! Go to sleep!' 'He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Smjagol,' said
Frodo. 'But if you really wish to be free of him again, then you must help
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.' Gollum sat up again and looked at him under his eyelids. 'He's over
there,' he cackled. 'Always there. Ores will take you all the way. Easy to
find Ores east of the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.' 'Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo. 'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum. 'Get up! ' said Frodo. Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff. 'Now! ’ said Frodo. 'Can you find a path easier by day or by night? We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll start tonight.' 'The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,’ Gollum whined. 'Not under the
White Face, not yet. It will go behind the hills soon, yess. Rest a bit
first, nice hobbits!’ 'Then sit down,' said Frodo, 'and don't move!' The hobbits seated themselves beside him, one on either side, with
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before
them. The stars grew thick and bright in the sky above. No one stirred.
Gollum sat with his legs drawn up, knees under chin, flat hands and feet
splayed on the ground, his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking
or listening. Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and they understood. They
relaxed, leaning their heads back, and shutting their eyes or seeming to. Soon the sound of their soft breathing could be heard. Gollum's hands
twitched a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved to the left and the
right, and first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made
no sign. Suddenly, with startling agility and speed, straight off the ground
with a jump like a grasshopper or a frog. Gollum bounded forward into the
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected. Sam was on
him before he had gone two paces after his spring. Frodo coming behind grabbed
his leg and threw him.
'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said. Sam got out the rope. 'And where were you off to in the cold hard
lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders, aye, we wonders. To find
some of your ore-friends, I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round
your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.' Gollum lay quiet and tried no further tricks. He did not answer Sam,
but gave him a swift venomous look. 'All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We want
him to walk, so it's no good tying his legs-or his arms, he seems to use
them nearly as much. Tie one end to his ankle, and keep a grip on the other
end.' He stood over Gollum, while Sam tied the knot. The result surprised
them both. Gollum began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very horrible to
hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope. He kept on screaming. At last Frodo was convinced that he really was in pain; but it could
not be from the knot. He examined it and found that it was not too tight,
indeed hardly tight enough. Sam was gentler than his words. 'What's the
matter with you? ' he said. 'If you will try to run away, you must be tied;
but we don't wish to hurt you.' 'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. 'It freezes, it bites! Elves
twisted it, curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape,
of course it is, precious. We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits
Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.' 'No, I will not take it off you,’ said Frodo, 'not unless' — he paused
a moment in thought — 'not unless there is any promise you can make that I
can trust.' 'We will swear to do what he wants, yes, yess, said Gollum, still
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. 'It hurts us.' 'Swear? ’ said Frodo. 'Smjagol,' said Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.' Frodo drew himself up, and again Sam was startled by his words and his
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think! One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them. Would you commit your promise to that, Smjagol? It will hold you. But
it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!' Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious, on the Precious! ' he repeated. 'And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo. 'To be very very good,' said Gollum. Then crawling to Frodo's feet he
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the
words shook his very bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never, never, to
let Him have it. Never! Smjagol will save it. But he must swear on the
Precious.' 'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking down at him with stern pity. 'All
you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, though you know it would
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it, if you will. For you know where it
is. Yes, you know, Smjagol. It is before you.' For a moment it appeared to Sam that his master had grown and Gollum
had shrunk: a tall stern shadow, a mighty lord who hid his brightness in
grey cloud, and at his feet a little whining dog. Yet the two were in some
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's minds. Gollum raised
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees. 'Down! down! ' said Frodo. 'Now speak your promise!’ 'We promises, yes I promise!’ said Gollum. ’I will serve the master of
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol, gollum, gollumY Suddenly he began
to weep and bite at his ankle again. 'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo. Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about,
like a whipped cur whose master has patted it. From that moment a change,
which lasted for some time, came over him. He spoke with less hissing and
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He
would cringe and flinch, if they stepped near him or made any sudden
movement, and he avoided the touch of their elven-cloaks; but he was
friendly, and indeed pitifully anxious to please. He would cackle with
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even if Frodo spoke kindly to
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked him. Sam said little to him of any sort. He
suspected him more deeply than ever, and if possible liked the new Gollum,
the Smjagol, less than the old. 'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he said, 'now for
it! The Moon's gone, and the night's going. We'd better start.' 'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I did. Ores
don’t use it, Ores don't know it. Ores don’t cross the Marshes, they go
round for miles and miles. Very lucky you came this way. Very lucky you
found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!' He took a few steps away and looked back inquiringly, like a dog
inviting them for a walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!' cried Sam. 'Not too far
ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.' 'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.' In the deep of night under hard clear stars they set off. Gollum led
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted
to the right away from the steep edge of the Emyn Muil, down the broken
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there
was a black silence.
Chapter 2 . The Passage of the Marshes Gollum moved quickly, with his head and neck thrust forward, often
using his hands as well as his feet. Frodo and Sam were hard put to it to
keep up with him; but he seemed no longer to have any thought of escaping,
and if they fell behind, he would turn and wait for them. After a time he
brought them to the brink of the narrow gully that they had struck before;
but they were now further from the hills. 'Here it is!' he cried. 'There is a way down inside, yes. Now we
follows it — out, out away over there.' He pointed south and east towards
the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in
the cool night air. . Gollum cast up and down along the brink, and at length he called to
them. 'Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went this way once: I went this
way, hiding from Ores.' He led the way, and following him the hobbits climbed down into the
gloom. It was not difficult, for the rift was at this point only some
fifteen feet deep and about a dozen across. There was running water at the
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled
down from the hills to feed the stagnant pools and mires beyond. Gollum
turned to the right, southward more or less, and splashed along with his
feet in the shallow stony stream. He seemed greatly delighted to feel the
water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song. The cold hard lands,
they bites our hands,
they gnaws our feet. The rocks and stones
are like old bones
all bare of meat. But stream and pool
is wet and cool:
so nice for feet! And now we wish — 'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said, looking sidelong at the hobbits.
'We'll tell you.' he croaked. 'He guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.’ A glint came into his eyes, and Sam catching the gleam in the darkness
thought it far from pleasant. Alive without breath;
as cold as death;
never thirsting, ever drinking;
clad in mail, never clinking. Drowns on dry land,
thinks an island
is a mountain;
thinks a fountain
is a puff of air. So sleek, so fair! What a joy to meet! We only wish
to catch a fish,
so juicy-sweet! These words only made more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that had
been troubling him from the moment when he understood that hir master was
going to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It did not occur to
him that his master might also have thought of it. hut he supposed Gollum
had. Indeed how had Gollum kept himself in all his lonely wandering? 'Not
too well,' thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what
hobbit tastes like if there ain't no fish, I'll wager — supposing as he
could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one.' They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it
seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned eastward, and as
they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above
grew faint with the first grey of morning. Gollum had shown no signs of
tiring, but now he looked up and halted. 'Day is near,' he whispered, as if Day was something that might
overhear him and spring on him. 'Smjagol will stay here: I will stay here,
and the Yellow Face won't see me.' 'We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, 'but we will stay here:
we are too tired to go any further at present.' 'You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face,' said Gollum. 'It
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Smjagol. Ores and nasty things
are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! ' The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of
the gully. It was not much more than a tall man’s height now, and at its
base there were wide flat shelves of dry stone; the water ran in a channel
on the other side. Frodo and Sam sat on one of the flats, resting their
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream. 'We must take a little food,' said Frodo. 'Are you hungry, Smjagol? We
have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.’ At the word hungry a greenish light was kindled in Gollum’s pale eyes,
and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For
a moment he relapsed into his old Gollum-manner. ’We are famisshed, yes
famisshed we are. precious,’ he said. 'What is it they eats? Have they nice
fisshes? ’ His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth, licking his
colourless lips. 'No, we have got no fish,’ said Frodo. 'We have only got this’ — he
held up a wafer of lembas — ’and water, if the water here is fit to drink.’ 'Yess, yess, nice water,’ said Gollum. 'Drink it, drink it, while we
can! But what is it they’ve got, precious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? ’ Frodo broke off a portion of a wafer and handed it to him on its
leaf- wrapping. Gollum sniffed at the leaf and his face changed: a spasm of
disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. 'Smjagol smells it! ’he
said. 'Leaves out of the elf-country, gah! They stinks. He climbed in those
trees, and he couldn’t wash the smell off his hands, my nice hands.’
Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the lembas and nibbled it. He spat,
and a fit of coughing shook him. 'Ach! No! ’ he spluttered. 'You try to choke poor Smjagol. Dust and
ashes, he can’t eat that. He must starve. But Smjagol doesn't mind. Nice
hobbits! Smjagol has promised. He will starve. He can’t eat hobbits' food. He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! ' 'I'm sorry,' said Frodo; 'but I can't help you, I'm afraid. I think
this food would do you good, if you would try. But perhaps you can't even
try, not yet anyway.’ The hobbits munched their lembas in silence. Sam thought that it tasted
far better, somehow, than it had for a good while: Gollum's behaviour had
made him attend to its flavour again. But he did not feel comfortable.
Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by
diner's chair. Only when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was
he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little.
'Look here! ' Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really
care whether Gollum heard him or not. 'We’ve got to get some sleep; but not
both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no promise. Smjagol
or Gollum, he won't change his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You go to
sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I'll call you when I can't keep my eyelids propped up.
Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.' 'Perhaps you're right, Sam,' said Frodo speaking openly. 'There is a
change in him, but just what kind of a change and how deep, I'm not sure
yet. Seriously though, I don't think there is any need for fear — at
present. Still watch if you wish. Give me about two hours, not more, and
then call me.' So tired was Frodo that his head fell forward on his breast and he
slept, almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to
have any fears. He curled up and went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned.
Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched teeth, hut he
lay still as stone. After a while, fearing that he would drop off himself,
if he sat listening to his two companions breathing, Sam got up and gently
prodded Gollum. His hands uncurled and twitched, but he made no other
movement. Sam bent down and said fissh close to his ear, but there was no
response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing. Sam scratched his head. 'Must really be asleep,' he muttered. 'And if I
was like Gollum, he wouldn't wake up never again.' He restrained the
thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat
down by his master. When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when
they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from his own feeling
of vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight
away, nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched
on his side. Gollum was not to be seen. Various reproachful names for
himself came to Sam's mind, drawn from the Gaffer's large paternal
word-hoard; then it also occurred to him that his master had been right:
there had for the present been nothing to guard against. They were at any
rate both alive and unthrottled. 'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got
to? ' 'Not far, not far! ' said a voice above him. He looked up and saw the
shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky.
'Here, what are you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back as
soon as he saw that shape. 'Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. 'Be back soon.' 'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished. Frodo woke at the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes.
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?' 'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I reckon. And he's gone off. Says
he's hungry.' 'Don't worry!' said Frodo. 'There's no help for it. But he'll come
back, you'll see. The promise will hold yet a while. And he won't leave his
Precious, anyway.' Frodo made light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for
hours with Gollum, and a very hungry Gollum too, loose beside them. 'Don't
think of any of your Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and
it has turned out well: we are now both rested. And we have a hard road
ahead, the worst road of all.' 'About the food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this
job? And when it's done, what are we going to do then? This waybread keeps
you on your legs in a wonderful way, though it doesn't satisfy the innards
proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to
them as made it. But you have to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't
grow. I reckon we've got enough to last, say, three weeks or so, and that
with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it
so far.' 'I don't know how long we shall take to — to finish,' said Frodo. 'We
were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, my dear hobbit —
indeed, Sam my dearest hobbit, friend of friends — I do not think we need
give thought to what comes after that. To do the job as you put it — what
hope is there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of
that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If we can nurse our limbs
to bring us to Mount Doom, that is all we can do. More than I can, I begin
to feel.’ Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did
not kiss it, though his tears fell on it. Then he turned away, drew his
sleeve over his nose, and got up, and stamped about, trying to whistle, and
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?'
It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly
that they did not hear him till he stood before them. His fingers and face
were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing and slavering. What he was
chewing, they did not ask or like to think. 'Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch! ' Gollum said nothing to them, until he had drunk deeply and washed
himself in the stream. Then he came up to them, licking his lips. 'Better
now,' he said. 'Are we rested? Ready to go on? Nice hobbits, they sleep
beautifully. Trust Smjagol now? Very, very good.' The next stage of their journey was much the same as the last. As they
went on the gully became ever shallower and the slope of its floor more
gradual. Its bottom was less stony and more earthy, and slowly its sides
dwindled to mere banks. It began to wind and wander. That night drew to its
end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they knew of the coming of
day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light. In a chill hour they came to the end of the water -course. The banks
became moss-grown mounds. Over the last shelf of rotting stone the stream
gurgled and fell down into a brown bog and was lost. Dry reeds hissed and
rattled though they could feel no wind. On either side and in front wide fens and mires now lay, stretching
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked
from dark and noisome pools. The reek of them hung stifling in the still
air. Far away, now almost due south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed,
like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea. The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of Gollum. They did now know,
and could not guess in that misty light, that they were in fact only just
within the northern borders of the marshes, the main expanse of which lay
south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have
retraced their steps a little, and then turning east have come round over
hard roads to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of the ancient battle
before the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course. On that stony plain there was no cover, and across it ran the highways of
the Ores and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of Lurien would
have concealed them there. 'How do we shape our course now, Smjagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross
these evil-smelling fens? '
'No need, no need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach
the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick. Back a little, and round a
little' — his skinny arm waved north and east — 'and you can come on hard
cold roads to the very gates of His country. Lots of His people will be
there looking out for guests, very pleased to take them straight to Him, O
yes. His Eye watches that way all the time. It caught Smjagol there, long
ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Smjagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes:
I've used eyes and feet and nose since then. 1 know other ways. More
difficult, not so quick; but better, if we don't want Him to see. Follow
Smjagol! He can take you through the marshes, through the mists, nice thick
mists. Follow Smjagol very carefully, and you may go a long way. quite a
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.' It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the marsh-reeks
lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low clouded sky, and Gollum seemed
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief rest they set out
again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of
the lands about, either the hills that they had left or the mountains that
they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo. Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went, he
often lagged. The hobbits soon found that what had looked like one vast fen
was really an endless network of pools, and soft mires, and winding
half- strangled water -courses. Among these a cunning eye and foot could
thread a wandering path. Gollum certainly had that cunning, and needed all
of it. His head on its long neck was ever turning this way and that, while
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would hold up
his hand and halt them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing
the ground with fingers or toes, or merely listening with one ear pressed to
the earth. It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this
forsaken country. The only green was the scum of livid weed on the dark
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses and rotting reeds loomed
up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers. As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists lifted,
growing thinner and more transparent. Far above the rot and vapours of the
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors
of dazzling foam, but only a passing ghost of her could they see below,
bleared, pale, giving no colour and no warmth. But even at this faint
reminder of her presence Gollum scowled and flinched. He halted their
journey, and they rested, squatting like little hunted animals, in the
borders of a great brown reed-thicket. There was a deep silence, only
scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken
grass-blades trembling in small air -movements that they could not feel. 'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully. 'No, no birds,' said Gollum. 'Nice birds! ' He licked his teeth. 'No
birds here. There are snakeses, wormses, things in the pools. Lots of
things, lots of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him
with distaste. So passed the third day of their journey with Gollum. Before the
shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on
and on with only brief halts. These they made not so much for rest as to
help Gollum; for now even he had to go forward with great care, and he was
sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead
Marshes, and it was dark. They walked slowly, stooping, keeping close in line, following
attentively every move that Gollum made. The fens grew more wet, opening
into wide stagnant meres, among which it grew more and more difficult to
find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking into gurgling
mud. The travellers were light, or maybe none of them would ever have found
a way through. Presently it grew altogether dark: the air itself seemed black and
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam rubbed his eyes: he thought his
head was going queer. He first saw one with the corner of his left eye, a
wisp of pale sheen that faded away; but others appeared soon after: some
like dimly shining smoke, some like misty flames flickering slowly above
unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets unfurled by
hidden hands. But neither of his companions spoke a word. At last Sam could bear it no longer. 'What's all this, Gollum? ' he
said in a whisper. 'These lights? They're all round us now. Are we trapped?
Who are they? ' Gollum looked up. A dark water was before him, and he was crawling on
the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round
us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles of corpses, yes, yes. Don't
you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? ' Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see
him. He went some paces back into the darkness, not daring to move far, or
to call in more than a hoarse whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo,
who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them. 'Come, Mr. Frodo! ' said Sam. 'Don't look at them! Gollum says we
mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as
we can — if we can! ' 'All right,' said Frodo, as if returning out of a dream. 'I'm coming. Go on! ' Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root
or tussock. He fell and came heavily on his hands, which sank deep into
sticky ooze, so that his face was brought close to the surface of the dark
mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the lights flickered
and danced and swirled. For a moment the water below him looked like some
window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was peering. Wrenching
his hands out of the bog, he sprang back with a cry. 'There are dead things,
dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces ! ' Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes, yes, yes: that is their names,' he
cackled. 'You should not look in when the candles are lit.’ 'Who are they? What are they? ’ asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo,
who was now behind him. ’I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen them
too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale
faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw them: grim faces and evil, and
noble faces and sad. Many faces proud and fair, and weeds in their silver
hair. But all foul, all rotting, all dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo
hid his eyes in his hands. 'I know not who they are; but I thought I saw
there Men and Elves, and Ores beside them.' 'Yes, yes,' said Gollum. 'All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Ores. The Dead Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him
when Smjagol was young, when I was young before the Precious came. It was
a great battle. Tall Men with long swords, and terrible Elves, and Orcses
shrieking. They fought on the plain for days and months at the Black Gates.
But the Marshes have grown since then, swallowed up the graves; always
creeping, creeping.'
'But that is an age and more ago,' said Sam. The Dead can’t be really
there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? ’ 'Who knows? Smjagol doesn't know,' answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach
them, you cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes, precious. I tried once;
but you cannot reach them. Only shapes to see, perhaps, not to touch. No
precious! All dead.' Sam looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed
why Smjagol had tried to touch them. 'Well, I don't want to see them,' he
said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? ' 'Yes, yes,' said Gollum. 'But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or
hobbits go down to join the Dead ones and light little candles. Follow
Smjagol! Don't look at lights! ' He crawled away to the right, seeking for a path round the mere. They
came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he did. 'Three
precious little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,'
thought Sam. At last they came to the end of the black mere, and they crossed it,
perilously, crawling or hopping from one treacherous island tussock to
another. Often they floundered, stepping or falling hands-first into waters
as noisome as a cesspool, till they were slimed and fouled almost up to
their necks and stank in one another's nostrils. It was late in the night when at length they reached firmer ground
again. Gollum hissed and whispered to himself, but it appeared that he was
pleased: in some mysterious way, by some blended sense of feel, and smell,
and uncanny memory for shapes in the dark, he seemed to know just where he
was again, and to be sure of his road ahead. 'Now on we go! 'he said. 'Nice hobbits! Brave hobbits! Very very
weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us.
