
“And really it’s a great relief to think he’s going, Hastings,”
continued my honest friend. “It was bad enough before, when we thought
he’d done it, but I’m hanged if it isn’t worse now, when we all feel
guilty for having been so down on the fellow. The fact is, we’ve
treated him abominably. Of course, things did look black against him. I
don’t see how anyone could blame us for jumping to the conclusions we
did. Still, there it is, we were in the wrong, and now there’s a
beastly feeling that one ought to make amends; which is difficult, when
one doesn’t like the fellow a bit better than one did before. The whole
thing’s damned awkward! And I’m thankful he’s had the tact to take
himself off. It’s a good thing Styles wasn’t the mater’s to leave to
him. Couldn’t bear to think of the fellow lording it here. He’s welcome
to her money.”
“You’ll be able to keep up the place all right?” I asked.
“Oh, yes. There are the death duties, of course, but half my father’s
money goes with the place, and Lawrence will stay with us for the
present, so there is his share as well. We shall be pinched at first,
of course, because, as I once told you, I am in a bit of a hole
financially myself. Still, the Johnnies will wait now.”
In the general relief at Inglethorp’s approaching departure, we had the
most genial breakfast we had experienced since the tragedy. Cynthia,
whose young spirits were naturally buoyant, was looking quite her
pretty self again, and we all, with the exception of Lawrence, who
seemed unalterably gloomy and nervous, were quietly cheerful, at the
opening of a new and hopeful future.
The papers, of course, had been full of the tragedy. Glaring headlines,
sandwiched biographies of every member of the household, subtle
innuendoes, the usual familiar tag about the police having a clue.
Nothing was spared us. It was a slack time. The war was momentarily
inactive, and the newspapers seized with avidity on this crime in
fashionable life: “The Mysterious Affair at Styles” was the topic of
the moment.
Naturally it was very annoying for the Cavendishes. The house was
constantly besieged by reporters, who were consistently denied
admission, but who continued to haunt the village and the grounds,
where they lay in wait with cameras, for any unwary members of the
household. We all lived in a blast of publicity. The Scotland Yard men
came and went, examining, questioning, lynx-eyed and reserved of
tongue. Towards what end they were working, we did not know. Had they
any clue, or would the whole thing remain in the category of
undiscovered crimes?
After breakfast, Dorcas came up to me rather mysteriously, and asked if
she might have a few words with me.
“Certainly. What is it, Dorcas?”
“Well, it’s just this, sir. You’ll be seeing the Belgian gentleman
to-day perhaps?” I nodded. “Well, sir, you know how he asked me so
particular if the mistress, or anyone else, had a green dress?”
“Yes, yes. You have found one?” My interest was aroused.
“No, not that, sir. But since then I’ve remembered what the young
gentlemen”—John and Lawrence were still the “young gentlemen” to
Dorcas—“call the ‘dressing-up box.’ It’s up in the front attic, sir. A
great chest, full of old clothes and fancy dresses, and what not. And
it came to me sudden like that there might be a green dress amongst
them. So, if you’d tell the Belgian gentleman——”
“I will tell him, Dorcas,” I promised.
“Thank you very much, sir. A very nice gentleman he is, sir. And quite
a different class from them two detectives from London, what goes
prying about, and asking questions. I don’t hold with foreigners as a
rule, but from what the newspapers say I make out as how these brave
Belges isn’t the ordinary run of foreigners, and certainly he’s a most
polite spoken gentleman.”
Dear old Dorcas! As she stood there, with her honest face upturned to
mine, I thought what a fine specimen she was of the old-fashioned
servant that is so fast dying out.
I thought I might as well go down to the village at once, and look up
Poirot; but I met him half-way, coming up to the house, and at once
gave him Dorcas’s message.
“Ah, the brave Dorcas! We will look at the chest, although—but no
matter—we will examine it all the same.”
We entered the house by one of the windows. There was no one in the
hall, and we went straight up to the attic.
Sure enough, there was the chest, a fine old piece, all studded with
brass nails, and full to overflowing with every imaginable type of
garment.
Poirot bundled everything out on the floor with scant ceremony. There
were one or two green fabrics of varying shades; but Poirot shook his
head over them all. He seemed somewhat apathetic in the search, as
though he expected no great results from it. Suddenly he gave an
exclamation.
“What is it?”
“Look!”
The chest was nearly empty, and there, reposing right at the bottom,
was a magnificent black beard.
“Ohó!” said Poirot. “Ohó!” He turned it over in his hands,
examining it closely. “New,” he remarked. “Yes, quite new.”
After a moment’s hesitation, he replaced it in the chest, heaped all
the other things on top of it as before, and made his way briskly
downstairs. He went straight to the pantry, where we found Dorcas
busily polishing her silver.
Poirot wished her good morning with Gallic politeness, and went on:
“We have been looking through that chest, Dorcas. I am much obliged to
you for mentioning it. There is, indeed, a fine collection there. Are
they often used, may I ask?”
“Well, sir, not very often nowadays, though from time to time we do
have what the young gentlemen call ‘a dress-up night.’ And very funny
it is sometimes, sir. Mr. Lawrence, he’s wonderful. Most comic! I shall
never forget the night he came down as the Char of Persia, I think he
called it—a sort of Eastern King it was. He had the big paper knife in
his hand, and ‘Mind, Dorcas,’ he says, ‘you’ll have to be very
respectful. This is my specially sharpened scimitar, and it’s off with
your head if I’m at all displeased with you!’ Miss Cynthia, she was
what they call an Apache, or some such name—a Frenchified sort of
cut-throat, I take it to be. A real sight she looked. You’d never have
believed a pretty young lady like that could have made herself into
such a ruffian. Nobody would have known her.”
“These evenings must have been great fun,” said Poirot genially. “I
suppose Mr. Lawrence wore that fine black beard in the chest upstairs,
when he was Shah of Persia?”
“He did have a beard, sir,” replied Dorcas, smiling. “And well I know
it, for he borrowed two skeins of my black wool to make it with! And
I’m sure it looked wonderfully natural at a distance. I didn’t know as
there was a beard up there at all. It must have been got quite lately,
I think. There was a red wig, I know, but nothing else in the way of
hair. Burnt corks they use mostly—though ‘tis messy getting it off
again. Miss Cynthia was a nigger once, and, oh, the trouble she had.”
“So Dorcas knows nothing about that black beard,” said Poirot
thoughtfully, as we walked out into the hall again.
“Do you think it is the one?” I whispered eagerly.
Poirot nodded.
“I do. You notice it had been trimmed?”
“No.”
“Yes. It was cut exactly the shape of Mr. Inglethorp’s, and I found one
or two snipped hairs. Hastings, this affair is very deep.”
“Who put it in the chest, I wonder?”
“Someone with a good deal of intelligence,” remarked Poirot dryly. “You
realize that he chose the one place in the house to hide it where its
presence would not be remarked? Yes, he is intelligent. But we must be
more intelligent. We must be so intelligent that he does not suspect us
of being intelligent at all.”
I acquiesced.
“There, mon ami, you will be of great assistance to me.”
I was pleased with the compliment. There had been times when I hardly
thought that Poirot appreciated me at my true worth.
“Yes,” he continued, staring at me thoughtfully, “you will be
invaluable.”
This was naturally gratifying, but Poirot’s next words were not so
welcome.
“I must have an ally in the house,” he observed reflectively.
“You have me,” I protested.
“True, but you are not sufficient.”
I was hurt, and showed it. Poirot hurried to explain himself.
“You do not quite take my meaning. You are known to be working with me.
I want somebody who is not associated with us in any way.”
“Oh, I see. How about John?”
“No, I think not.”
“The dear fellow isn’t perhaps very bright,” I said thoughtfully.
“Here comes Miss Howard,” said Poirot suddenly. “She is the very
person. But I am in her black books, since I cleared Mr. Inglethorp.
Still, we can but try.”
With a nod that was barely civil, Miss Howard assented to Poirot’s
request for a few minutes’ conversation.
We went into the little morning-room, and Poirot closed the door.
“Well, Monsieur Poirot,” said Miss Howard impatiently, “what is it? Out
with it. I’m busy.”
“Do you remember, mademoiselle, that I once asked you to help me?”
“Yes, I do.” The lady nodded. “And I told you I’d help you with
pleasure—to hang Alfred Inglethorp.”
“Ah!” Poirot studied her seriously. “Miss Howard, I will ask you one
question. I beg of you to reply to it truthfully.”
“Never tell lies,” replied Miss Howard.
“It is this. Do you still believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by
her husband?”
“What do you mean?” she asked sharply. “You needn’t think your pretty
explanations influence me in the slightest. I’ll admit that it wasn’t
he who bought strychnine at the chemist’s shop. What of that? I dare
say he soaked fly paper, as I told you at the beginning.”
“That is arsenic—not strychnine,” said Poirot mildly.
“What does that matter? Arsenic would put poor Emily out of the way
just as well as strychnine. If I’m convinced he did it, it doesn’t
matter a jot to me how he did it.”
“Exactly. If you are convinced he did it,” said Poirot quietly. “I
will put my question in another form. Did you ever in your heart of
hearts believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by her husband?”
“Good heavens!” cried Miss Howard. “Haven’t I always told you the man
is a villain? Haven’t I always told you he would murder her in her bed?
Haven’t I always hated him like poison?”
“Exactly,” said Poirot. “That bears out my little idea entirely.”
“What little idea?”
“Miss Howard, do you remember a conversation that took place on the day
of my friend’s arrival here? He repeated it to me, and there is a
sentence of yours that has impressed me very much. Do you remember
affirming that if a crime had been committed, and anyone you loved had
been murdered, you felt certain that you would know by instinct who the
criminal was, even if you were quite unable to prove it?”
“Yes, I remember saying that. I believe it too. I suppose you think it
nonsense?”
“Not at all.”
“And yet you will pay no attention to my instinct against Alfred
Inglethorp.”
“No,” said Poirot curtly. “Because your instinct is not against Mr.
Inglethorp.”
“What?”
“No. You wish to believe he committed the crime. You believe him
capable of committing it. But your instinct tells you he did not commit
it. It tells you more—shall I go on?”
She was staring at him, fascinated, and made a slight affirmative
movement of the hand.
“Shall I tell you why you have been so vehement against Mr. Inglethorp?
It is because you have been trying to believe what you wish to believe.
It is because you are trying to drown and stifle your instinct, which
tells you another name——”
“No, no, no!” cried Miss Howard wildly, flinging up her hands. “Don’t
say it! Oh, don’t say it! It isn’t true! It can’t be true. I don’t know
what put such a wild—such a dreadful—idea into my head!”
“I am right, am I not?” asked Poirot.
“Yes, yes; you must be a wizard to have guessed. But it can’t be
so—it’s too monstrous, too impossible. It must be Alfred Inglethorp.”
Poirot shook his head gravely.
“Don’t ask me about it,” continued Miss Howard, “because I shan’t tell
you. I won’t admit it, even to myself. I must be mad to think of such a
thing.”
Poirot nodded, as if satisfied.
“I will ask you nothing. It is enough for me that it is as I thought.
And I—I, too, have an instinct. We are working together towards a
common end.”
“Don’t ask me to help you, because I won’t. I wouldn’t lift a finger
to—to——” She faltered.
“You will help me in spite of yourself. I ask you nothing—but you will
be my ally. You will not be able to help yourself. You will do the only
thing that I want of you.”
“And that is?”
“You will watch!”
Evelyn Howard bowed her head.
“Yes, I can’t help doing that. I am always watching—always hoping I
shall be proved wrong.”
“If we are wrong, well and good,” said Poirot. “No one will be more
pleased than I shall. But, if we are right? If we are right, Miss
Howard, on whose side are you then?”
“I don’t know, I don’t know——”
“Come now.”
“It could be hushed up.”
“There must be no hushing up.”
“But Emily herself——” She broke off.
“Miss Howard,” said Poirot gravely, “this is unworthy of you.”
Suddenly she took her face from her hands.
“Yes,” she said quietly, “that was not Evelyn Howard who spoke!” She
flung her head up proudly. “This is Evelyn Howard! And she is on the
side of Justice! Let the cost be what it may.” And with these words,
she walked firmly out of the room.
“There,” said Poirot, looking after her, “goes a very valuable ally.
That woman, Hastings, has got brains as well as a heart.”
I did not reply.
“Instinct is a marvellous thing,” mused Poirot. “It can neither be
explained nor ignored.”
“You and Miss Howard seem to know what you are talking about,” I
observed coldly. “Perhaps you don’t realize that I am still in the
dark.”
“Really? Is that so, mon ami?”
“Yes. Enlighten me, will you?”
Poirot studied me attentively for a moment or two. Then, to my intense
surprise, he shook his head decidedly.
“No, my friend.”
“Oh, look here, why not?”
“Two is enough for a secret.”
“Well, I think it is very unfair to keep back facts from me.”
“I am not keeping back facts. Every fact that I know is in your
possession. You can draw your own deductions from them. This time it is
a question of ideas.”
“Still, it would be interesting to know.”
Poirot looked at me very earnestly, and again shook his head.
“You see,” he said sadly, “you have no instincts.”
“It was intelligence you were requiring just now,” I pointed out.
“The two often go together,” said Poirot enigmatically.
The remark seemed so utterly irrelevant that I did not even take the
trouble to answer it. But I decided that if I made any interesting and
important discoveries—as no doubt I should—I would keep them to myself,
and surprise Poirot with the ultimate result.
There are times when it is one’s duty to assert oneself.
CHAPTER IX. DR. BAUERSTEIN
I had had no opportunity as yet of passing on Poirot’s message to
Lawrence. But now, as I strolled out on the lawn, still nursing a
grudge against my friend’s high-handedness, I saw Lawrence on the
croquet lawn, aimlessly knocking a couple of very ancient balls about,
with a still more ancient mallet.
It struck me that it would be a good opportunity to deliver my message.
Otherwise, Poirot himself might relieve me of it. It was true that I
did not quite gather its purport, but I flattered myself that by
Lawrence’s reply, and perhaps a little skillful cross-examination on my
part, I should soon perceive its significance. Accordingly I accosted
him.
“I’ve been looking for you,” I remarked untruthfully.
“Have you?”
“Yes. The truth is, I’ve got a message for you—from Poirot.”
“Yes?”
“He told me to wait until I was alone with you,” I said, dropping my
voice significantly, and watching him intently out of the corner of my
eye. I have always been rather good at what is called, I believe,
creating an atmosphere.
“Well?”
There was no change of expression in the dark melancholic face. Had he
any idea of what I was about to say?
“This is the message.” I dropped my voice still lower. “‘Find the extra
coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace.’”
“What on earth does he mean?” Lawrence stared at me in quite unaffected
astonishment.
“Don’t you know?”
“Not in the least. Do you?”
I was compelled to shake my head.
“What extra coffee-cup?”
“I don’t know.”
“He’d better ask Dorcas, or one of the maids, if he wants to know about
coffee-cups. It’s their business, not mine. I don’t know anything about
the coffee-cups, except that we’ve got some that are never used, which
are a perfect dream! Old Worcester. You’re not a connoisseur, are you,
Hastings?”
I shook my head.
“You miss a lot. A really perfect bit of old china—it’s pure delight to
handle it, or even to look at it.”
“Well, what am I to tell Poirot?”
“Tell him I don’t know what he’s talking about. It’s double Dutch to
me.”
“All right.”
I was moving off towards the house again when he suddenly called me
back.
“I say, what was the end of that message? Say it over again, will you?”
“‘Find the extra coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace.’ Are you sure
you don’t know what it means?” I asked him earnestly.
He shook his head.
“No,” he said musingly, “I don’t. I—I wish I did.”
The boom of the gong sounded from the house, and we went in together.
Poirot had been asked by John to remain to lunch, and was already
seated at the table.
By tacit consent, all mention of the tragedy was barred. We conversed
on the war, and other outside topics. But after the cheese and biscuits
had been handed round, and Dorcas had left the room, Poirot suddenly
leant forward to Mrs. Cavendish.
“Pardon me, madame, for recalling unpleasant memories, but I have a
little idea”—Poirot’s “little ideas” were becoming a perfect
byword—“and would like to ask one or two questions.”
“Of me? Certainly.”
“You are too amiable, madame. What I want to ask is this: the door
leading into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room from that of Mademoiselle Cynthia,
it was bolted, you say?”
“Certainly it was bolted,” replied Mary Cavendish, rather surprised. “I
said so at the inquest.”
“Bolted?”
“Yes.” She looked perplexed.
“I mean,” explained Poirot, “you are sure it was bolted, and not merely
locked?”
“Oh, I see what you mean. No, I don’t know. I said bolted, meaning that
it was fastened, and I could not open it, but I believe all the doors
were found bolted on the inside.”
“Still, as far as you are concerned, the door might equally well have
been locked?”
“Oh, yes.”
“You yourself did not happen to notice, madame, when you entered Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room, whether that door was bolted or not?”
“I—I believe it was.”
“But you did not see it?”
“No. I—never looked.”
“But I did,” interrupted Lawrence suddenly. “I happened to notice
that it was bolted.”
“Ah, that settles it.” And Poirot looked crestfallen.
I could not help rejoicing that, for once, one of his “little ideas”
had come to naught.
After lunch Poirot begged me to accompany him home. I consented rather
stiffly.
“You are annoyed, is it not so?” he asked anxiously, as we walked
through the park.
“Not at all,” I said coldly.
“That is well. That lifts a great load from my mind.”
This was not quite what I had intended. I had hoped that he would have
observed the stiffness of my manner. Still, the fervour of his words
went towards the appeasing of my just displeasure. I thawed.
“I gave Lawrence your message,” I said.
“And what did he say? He was entirely puzzled?”
“Yes. I am quite sure he had no idea of what you meant.”
I had expected Poirot to be disappointed; but, to my surprise, he
replied that that was as he had thought, and that he was very glad. My
pride forbade me to ask any questions.
Poirot switched off on another tack.
“Mademoiselle Cynthia was not at lunch to-day? How was that?”
“She is at the hospital again. She resumed work to-day.”
“Ah, she is an industrious little demoiselle. And pretty too. She is
like pictures I have seen in Italy. I would rather like to see that
dispensary of hers. Do you think she would show it to me?”
“I am sure she would be delighted. It’s an interesting little place.”
“Does she go there every day?”
“She has all Wednesdays off, and comes back to lunch on Saturdays.
Those are her only times off.”
“I will remember. Women are doing great work nowadays, and Mademoiselle
Cynthia is clever—oh, yes, she has brains, that little one.”
“Yes. I believe she has passed quite a stiff exam.”
“Without doubt. After all, it is very responsible work. I suppose they
have very strong poisons there?”
“Yes, she showed them to us. They are kept locked up in a little
cupboard. I believe they have to be very careful. They always take out
the key before leaving the room.”
“Indeed. It is near the window, this cupboard?”
“No, right the other side of the room. Why?”
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“I wondered. That is all. Will you come in?”
We had reached the cottage.
“No. I think I’ll be getting back. I shall go round the long way
through the woods.”
The woods round Styles were very beautiful. After the walk across the
open park, it was pleasant to saunter lazily through the cool glades.
There was hardly a breath of wind, the very chirp of the birds was
faint and subdued. I strolled on a little way, and finally flung myself
down at the foot of a grand old beech-tree. My thoughts of mankind were
kindly and charitable. I even forgave Poirot for his absurd secrecy. In
fact, I was at peace with the world. Then I yawned.
I thought about the crime, and it struck me as being very unreal and
far off.
I yawned again.
Probably, I thought, it really never happened. Of course, it was all a
bad dream. The truth of the matter was that it was Lawrence who had
murdered Alfred Inglethorp with a croquet mallet. But it was absurd of
John to make such a fuss about it, and to go shouting out: “I tell you
I won’t have it!”
I woke up with a start.
At once I realized that I was in a very awkward predicament. For, about
twelve feet away from me, John and Mary Cavendish were standing facing
each other, and they were evidently quarrelling. And, quite as
evidently, they were unaware of my vicinity, for before I could move or
speak John repeated the words which had aroused me from my dream.
“I tell you, Mary, I won’t have it.”
Mary’s voice came, cool and liquid:
“Have you any right to criticize my actions?”
“It will be the talk of the village! My mother was only buried on
Saturday, and here you are gadding about with the fellow.”
“Oh,” she shrugged her shoulders, “if it is only village gossip that
you mind!”
“But it isn’t. I’ve had enough of the fellow hanging about. He’s a
Polish Jew, anyway.”
“A tinge of Jewish blood is not a bad thing. It leavens the”—she looked
at him—“stolid stupidity of the ordinary Englishman.”
Fire in her eyes, ice in her voice. I did not wonder that the blood
rose to John’s face in a crimson tide.
“Mary!”
“Well?” Her tone did not change.
The pleading died out of his voice.
“Am I to understand that you will continue to see Bauerstein against my
express wishes?”
“If I choose.”
“You defy me?”
“No, but I deny your right to criticize my actions. Have you no
friends of whom I should disapprove?”
John fell back a pace. The colour ebbed slowly from his face.
“What do you mean?” he said, in an unsteady voice.
“You see!” said Mary quietly. “You do see, don’t you, that you have
no right to dictate to me as to the choice of my friends?”
John glanced at her pleadingly, a stricken look on his face.
“No right? Have I no right, Mary?” he said unsteadily. He stretched
out his hands. “Mary——”
For a moment, I thought she wavered. A softer expression came over her
face, then suddenly she turned almost fiercely away.
“None!”
She was walking away when John sprang after her, and caught her by the
arm.
“Mary”—his voice was very quiet now—“are you in love with this fellow
Bauerstein?”
She hesitated, and suddenly there swept across her face a strange
expression, old as the hills, yet with something eternally young about
it. So might some Egyptian sphinx have smiled.
She freed herself quietly from his arm, and spoke over her shoulder.
“Perhaps,” she said; and then swiftly passed out of the little glade,
leaving John standing there as though he had been turned to stone.
Rather ostentatiously, I stepped forward, crackling some dead branches
with my feet as I did so. John turned. Luckily, he took it for granted
that I had only just come upon the scene.
“Hullo, Hastings. Have you seen the little fellow safely back to his
cottage? Quaint little chap! Is he any good, though, really?”
“He was considered one of the finest detectives of his day.”
“Oh, well, I suppose there must be something in it, then. What a rotten
world it is, though!”
“You find it so?” I asked.
“Good Lord, yes! There’s this terrible business to start with. Scotland
Yard men in and out of the house like a jack-in-the-box! Never know
where they won’t turn up next. Screaming headlines in every paper in
the country—damn all journalists, I say! Do you know there was a whole
crowd staring in at the lodge gates this morning. Sort of Madame
Tussaud’s chamber of horrors business that can be seen for nothing.
Pretty thick, isn’t it?”
“Cheer up, John!” I said soothingly. “It can’t last for ever.”
“Can’t it, though? It can last long enough for us never to be able to
hold up our heads again.”
“No, no, you’re getting morbid on the subject.”
“Enough to make a man morbid, to be stalked by beastly journalists and
stared at by gaping moon-faced idiots, wherever he goes! But there’s
worse than that.”
“What?”
John lowered his voice:
“Have you ever thought, Hastings—it’s a nightmare to me—who did it? I
can’t help feeling sometimes it must have been an accident.
Because—because—who could have done it? Now Inglethorp’s out of the
way, there’s no one else; no one, I mean, except—one of us.”
Yes, indeed, that was nightmare enough for any man! One of us? Yes,
surely it must be so, unless——-
A new idea suggested itself to my mind. Rapidly, I considered it. The
light increased. Poirot’s mysterious doings, his hints—they all fitted
in. Fool that I was not to have thought of this possibility before, and
what a relief for us all.
“No, John,” I said, “it isn’t one of us. How could it be?”
“I know, but, still, who else is there?”
“Can’t you guess?”
“No.”
I looked cautiously round, and lowered my voice.
“Dr. Bauerstein!” I whispered.
“Impossible!”
“Not at all.”
“But what earthly interest could he have in my mother’s death?”
“That I don’t see,” I confessed, “but I’ll tell you this: Poirot thinks
so.”
“Poirot? Does he? How do you know?”
I told him of Poirot’s intense excitement on hearing that Dr.
Bauerstein had been at Styles on the fatal night, and added:
“He said twice: ‘That alters everything.’ And I’ve been thinking. You
know Inglethorp said he had put down the coffee in the hall? Well, it
was just then that Bauerstein arrived. Isn’t it possible that, as
Inglethorp brought him through the hall, the doctor dropped something
into the coffee in passing?”
“H’m,” said John. “It would have been very risky.”
“Yes, but it was possible.”
“And then, how could he know it was her coffee? No, old fellow, I don’t
think that will wash.”
But I had remembered something else.
“You’re quite right. That wasn’t how it was done. Listen.” And I then
told him of the cocoa sample which Poirot had taken to be analysed.
John interrupted just as I had done.
“But, look here, Bauerstein had had it analysed already?”
“Yes, yes, that’s the point. I didn’t see it either until now. Don’t
you understand? Bauerstein had it analysed—that’s just it! If
Bauerstein’s the murderer, nothing could be simpler than for him to
substitute some ordinary cocoa for his sample, and send that to be
tested. And of course they would find no strychnine! But no one would
dream of suspecting Bauerstein, or think of taking another
sample—except Poirot,” I added, with belated recognition.
“Yes, but what about the bitter taste that cocoa won’t disguise?”
“Well, we’ve only his word for that. And there are other possibilities.
He’s admittedly one of the world’s greatest toxicologists——”
“One of the world’s greatest what? Say it again.”
“He knows more about poisons than almost anybody,” I explained. “Well,
my idea is, that perhaps he’s found some way of making strychnine
tasteless. Or it may not have been strychnine at all, but some obscure
drug no one has ever heard of, which produces much the same symptoms.”
“H’m, yes, that might be,” said John. “But look here, how could he have
got at the cocoa? That wasn’t downstairs?”
“No, it wasn’t,” I admitted reluctantly.
And then, suddenly, a dreadful possibility flashed through my mind. I
hoped and prayed it would not occur to John also. I glanced sideways at
him. He was frowning perplexedly, and I drew a deep breath of relief,
for the terrible thought that had flashed across my mind was this: that
Dr. Bauerstein might have had an accomplice.
Yet surely it could not be! Surely no woman as beautiful as Mary
Cavendish could be a murderess. Yet beautiful women had been known to
poison.
And suddenly I remembered that first conversation at tea on the day of
my arrival, and the gleam in her eyes as she had said that poison was a
woman’s weapon. How agitated she had been on that fatal Tuesday
evening! Had Mrs. Inglethorp discovered something between her and
Bauerstein, and threatened to tell her husband? Was it to stop that
denunciation that the crime had been committed?
Then I remembered that enigmatical conversation between Poirot and
Evelyn Howard. Was this what they had meant? Was this the monstrous
possibility that Evelyn had tried not to believe?
Yes, it all fitted in.
No wonder Miss Howard had suggested “hushing it up.” Now I understood
that unfinished sentence of hers: “Emily herself——” And in my heart I
agreed with her. Would not Mrs. Inglethorp have preferred to go
unavenged rather than have such terrible dishonour fall upon the name
of Cavendish.
“There’s another thing,” said John suddenly, and the unexpected sound
of his voice made me start guiltily. “Something which makes me doubt if
what you say can be true.”
“What’s that?” I asked, thankful that he had gone away from the subject
of how the poison could have been introduced into the cocoa.
“Why, the fact that Bauerstein demanded a post-mortem. He needn’t have
done so. Little Wilkins would have been quite content to let it go at
heart disease.”
“Yes,” I said doubtfully. “But we don’t know. Perhaps he thought it
safer in the long run. Someone might have talked afterwards. Then the
Home Office might have ordered exhumation. The whole thing would have
come out, then, and he would have been in an awkward position, for no
one would have believed that a man of his reputation could have been
deceived into calling it heart disease.”
“Yes, that’s possible,” admitted John. “Still,” he added, “I’m blest if
I can see what his motive could have been.”
I trembled.
“Look here,” I said, “I may be altogether wrong. And, remember, all
this is in confidence.”
“Oh, of course—that goes without saying.”
We had walked, as we talked, and now we passed through the little gate
into the garden. Voices rose near at hand, for tea was spread out under
the sycamore-tree, as it had been on the day of my arrival.
Cynthia was back from the hospital, and I placed my chair beside her,
and told her of Poirot’s wish to visit the dispensary.
“Of course! I’d love him to see it. He’d better come to tea there one
day. I must fix it up with him. He’s such a dear little man! But he
is funny. He made me take the brooch out of my tie the other day, and
put it in again, because he said it wasn’t straight.”
I laughed.
“It’s quite a mania with him.”
“Yes, isn’t it?”
We were silent for a minute or two, and then, glancing in the direction
of Mary Cavendish, and dropping her voice, Cynthia said:
“Mr. Hastings.”
“Yes?”
“After tea, I want to talk to you.”
Her glance at Mary had set me thinking. I fancied that between these
two there existed very little sympathy. For the first time, it occurred
to me to wonder about the girl’s future. Mrs. Inglethorp had made no
provisions of any kind for her, but I imagined that John and Mary would
probably insist on her making her home with them—at any rate until the
end of the war. John, I knew, was very fond of her, and would be sorry
to let her go.
John, who had gone into the house, now reappeared. His good-natured
face wore an unaccustomed frown of anger.
“Confound those detectives! I can’t think what they’re after! They’ve
been in every room in the house—turning things inside out, and upside
down. It really is too bad! I suppose they took advantage of our all
being out. I shall go for that fellow Japp, when I next see him!”
“Lot of Paul Prys,” grunted Miss Howard.
Lawrence opined that they had to make a show of doing something.
Mary Cavendish said nothing.
After tea, I invited Cynthia to come for a walk, and we sauntered off
into the woods together.
“Well?” I inquired, as soon as we were protected from prying eyes by
the leafy screen.
With a sigh, Cynthia flung herself down, and tossed off her hat. The
sunlight, piercing through the branches, turned the auburn of her hair
to quivering gold.
“Mr. Hastings—you are always so kind, and you know such a lot.”
It struck me at this moment that Cynthia was really a very charming
girl! Much more charming than Mary, who never said things of that kind.
“Well?” I asked benignantly, as she hesitated.
“I want to ask your advice. What shall I do?”
“Do?”
“Yes. You see, Aunt Emily always told me I should be provided for. I
suppose she forgot, or didn’t think she was likely to die—anyway, I am
not provided for! And I don’t know what to do. Do you think I ought
to go away from here at once?”
“Good heavens, no! They don’t want to part with you, I’m sure.”
Cynthia hesitated a moment, plucking up the grass with her tiny hands.
Then she said: “Mrs. Cavendish does. She hates me.”
“Hates you?” I cried, astonished.
Cynthia nodded.
“Yes. I don’t know why, but she can’t bear me; and he can’t, either.”
“There I know you’re wrong,” I said warmly. “On the contrary, John is
very fond of you.”
“Oh, yes—John. I meant Lawrence. Not, of course, that I care whether
Lawrence hates me or not. Still, it’s rather horrid when no one loves
you, isn’t it?”
“But they do, Cynthia dear,” I said earnestly. “I’m sure you are
mistaken. Look, there is John—and Miss Howard——”
Cynthia nodded rather gloomily. “Yes, John likes me, I think, and of
course Evie, for all her gruff ways, wouldn’t be unkind to a fly. But
Lawrence never speaks to me if he can help it, and Mary can hardly
bring herself to be civil to me. She wants Evie to stay on, is begging
her to, but she doesn’t want me, and—and—I don’t know what to do.”
Suddenly the poor child burst out crying.
I don’t know what possessed me. Her beauty, perhaps, as she sat there,
with the sunlight glinting down on her head; perhaps the sense of
relief at encountering someone who so obviously could have no
connection with the tragedy; perhaps honest pity for her youth and
loneliness. Anyway, I leant forward, and taking her little hand, I said
awkwardly:
“Marry me, Cynthia.”
Unwittingly, I had hit upon a sovereign remedy for her tears. She sat
up at once, drew her hand away, and said, with some asperity:
“Don’t be silly!”
I was a little annoyed.
“I’m not being silly. I am asking you to do me the honour of becoming
my wife.”
To my intense surprise, Cynthia burst out laughing, and called me a
“funny dear.”
“It’s perfectly sweet of you,” she said, “but you know you don’t want
to!”
“Yes, I do. I’ve got——”
“Never mind what you’ve got. You don’t really want to—and I don’t
either.”
“Well, of course, that settles it,” I said stiffly. “But I don’t see
anything to laugh at. There’s nothing funny about a proposal.”
“No, indeed,” said Cynthia. “Somebody might accept you next time.
Good-bye, you’ve cheered me up very much.”
And, with a final uncontrollable burst of merriment, she vanished
through the trees.
Thinking over the interview, it struck me as being profoundly
unsatisfactory.
It occurred to me suddenly that I would go down to the village, and
look up Bauerstein. Somebody ought to be keeping an eye on the fellow.
At the same time, it would be wise to allay any suspicions he might
have as to his being suspected. I remembered how Poirot had relied on
my diplomacy. Accordingly, I went to the little house with the
“Apartments” card inserted in the window, where I knew he lodged, and
tapped on the door.
An old woman came and opened it.
“Good afternoon,” I said pleasantly. “Is Dr. Bauerstein in?”
She stared at me.
“Haven’t you heard?”
“Heard what?”
“About him.”
“What about him?”
“He’s took.”
“Took? Dead?”
“No, took by the perlice.”
“By the police!” I gasped. “Do you mean they’ve arrested him?”
“Yes, that’s it, and——”
I waited to hear no more, but tore up the village to find Poirot.
CHAPTER X. THE ARREST
To my extreme annoyance, Poirot was not in, and the old Belgian who
answered my knock informed me that he believed he had gone to London.
I was dumbfounded. What on earth could Poirot be doing in London! Was
it a sudden decision on his part, or had he already made up his mind
when he parted from me a few hours earlier?
I retraced my steps to Styles in some annoyance. With Poirot away, I
was uncertain how to act. Had he foreseen this arrest? Had he not, in
all probability, been the cause of it? Those questions I could not
resolve. But in the meantime what was I to do? Should I announce the
arrest openly at Styles, or not? Though I did not acknowledge it to
myself, the thought of Mary Cavendish was weighing on me. Would it not
be a terrible shock to her? For the moment, I set aside utterly any
suspicions of her. She could not be implicated—otherwise I should have
heard some hint of it.
Of course, there was no possibility of being able permanently to
conceal Dr. Bauerstein’s arrest from her. It would be announced in
every newspaper on the morrow. Still, I shrank from blurting it out. If
only Poirot had been accessible, I could have asked his advice. What
possessed him to go posting off to London in this unaccountable way?
In spite of myself, my opinion of his sagacity was immeasurably
heightened. I would never have dreamt of suspecting the doctor, had not
Poirot put it into my head. Yes, decidedly, the little man was clever.
After some reflecting, I decided to take John into my confidence, and
leave him to make the matter public or not, as he thought fit.
He gave vent to a prodigious whistle, as I imparted the news.
“Great Scott! You were right, then. I couldn’t believe it at the
time.”
“No, it is astonishing until you get used to the idea, and see how it
makes everything fit in. Now, what are we to do? Of course, it will be
generally known to-morrow.”
John reflected.
“Never mind,” he said at last, “we won’t say anything at present. There
is no need. As you say, it will be known soon enough.”
But to my intense surprise, on getting down early the next morning, and
eagerly opening the newspapers, there was not a word about the arrest!
There was a column of mere padding about “The Styles Poisoning Case,”
but nothing further. It was rather inexplicable, but I supposed that,
for some reason or other, Japp wished to keep it out of the papers. It
worried me just a little, for it suggested the possibility that there
might be further arrests to come.
After breakfast, I decided to go down to the village, and see if Poirot
had returned yet; but, before I could start, a well-known face blocked
one of the windows, and the well-known voice said:
“Bonjour, mon ami!”
“Poirot,” I exclaimed, with relief, and seizing him by both hands, I
dragged him into the room. “I was never so glad to see anyone. Listen,
I have said nothing to anybody but John. Is that right?”
“My friend,” replied Poirot, “I do not know what you are talking
about.”
“Dr. Bauerstein’s arrest, of course,” I answered impatiently.
“Is Bauerstein arrested, then?”
“Did you not know it?”
“Not the least in the world.” But, pausing a moment, he added: “Still,
it does not surprise me. After all, we are only four miles from the
coast.”
“The coast?” I asked, puzzled. “What has that got to do with it?”
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“Surely, it is obvious!”
“Not to me. No doubt I am very dense, but I cannot see what the
proximity of the coast has got to do with the murder of Mrs.
Inglethorp.”
“Nothing at all, of course,” replied Poirot, smiling. “But we were
speaking of the arrest of Dr. Bauerstein.”
“Well, he is arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp——”
“What?” cried Poirot, in apparently lively astonishment. “Dr.
Bauerstein arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp?”
“Yes.”
“Impossible! That would be too good a farce! Who told you that, my
friend?”
“Well, no one exactly told me,” I confessed. “But he is arrested.”
“Oh, yes, very likely. But for espionage, mon ami.”
“Espionage?” I gasped.
“Precisely.”
“Not for poisoning Mrs. Inglethorp?”
“Not unless our friend Japp has taken leave of his senses,” replied
Poirot placidly.
“But—but I thought you thought so too?”
Poirot gave me one look, which conveyed a wondering pity, and his full
sense of the utter absurdity of such an idea.
“Do you mean to say,” I asked, slowly adapting myself to the new idea,
“that Dr. Bauerstein is a spy?”
Poirot nodded.
“Have you never suspected it?”
“It never entered my head.”
“It did not strike you as peculiar that a famous London doctor should
bury himself in a little village like this, and should be in the habit
of walking about at all hours of the night, fully dressed?”
“No,” I confessed, “I never thought of such a thing.”
“He is, of course, a German by birth,” said Poirot thoughtfully,
“though he has practised so long in this country that nobody thinks of
him as anything but an Englishman. He was naturalized about fifteen
years ago. A very clever man—a Jew, of course.”
“The blackguard!” I cried indignantly.
“Not at all. He is, on the contrary, a patriot. Think what he stands to
lose. I admire the man myself.”
But I could not look at it in Poirot’s philosophical way.
“And this is the man with whom Mrs. Cavendish has been wandering about
all over the country!” I cried indignantly.
“Yes. I should fancy he had found her very useful,” remarked Poirot.
“So long as gossip busied itself in coupling their names together, any
other vagaries of the doctor’s passed unobserved.”
“Then you think he never really cared for her?” I asked eagerly—rather
too eagerly, perhaps, under the circumstances.
“That, of course, I cannot say, but—shall I tell you my own private
opinion, Hastings?”
“Yes.”
“Well, it is this: that Mrs. Cavendish does not care, and never has
cared one little jot about Dr. Bauerstein!”
“Do you really think so?” I could not disguise my pleasure.
“I am quite sure of it. And I will tell you why.”
“Yes?”
“Because she cares for someone else, mon ami.”
“Oh!” What did he mean? In spite of myself, an agreeable warmth spread
over me. I am not a vain man where women are concerned, but I
remembered certain evidences, too lightly thought of at the time,
perhaps, but which certainly seemed to indicate——
My pleasing thoughts were interrupted by the sudden entrance of Miss
Howard. She glanced round hastily to make sure there was no one else in
the room, and quickly produced an old sheet of brown paper. This she
handed to Poirot, murmuring as she did so the cryptic words:
“On top of the wardrobe.” Then she hurriedly left the room.
Poirot unfolded the sheet of paper eagerly, and uttered an exclamation
of satisfaction. He spread it out on the table.
“Come here, Hastings. Now tell me, what is that initial—J. or L.?”
It was a medium sized sheet of paper, rather dusty, as though it had
lain by for some time. But it was the label that was attracting
Poirot’s attention. At the top, it bore the printed stamp of Messrs.
Parkson’s, the well-known theatrical costumiers, and it was addressed
to “—(the debatable initial) Cavendish, Esq., Styles Court, Styles St.
Mary, Essex.”
“It might be T., or it might be L.,” I said, after studying the thing
for a minute or two. “It certainly isn’t a J.”
“Good,” replied Poirot, folding up the paper again. “I, also, am of
your way of thinking. It is an L., depend upon it!”
“Where did it come from?” I asked curiously. “Is it important?”
“Moderately so. It confirms a surmise of mine. Having deduced its
existence, I set Miss Howard to search for it, and, as you see, she has
been successful.”
“What did she mean by ‘On the top of the wardrobe’?”
“She meant,” replied Poirot promptly, “that she found it on top of a
wardrobe.”
“A funny place for a piece of brown paper,” I mused.
“Not at all. The top of a wardrobe is an excellent place for brown
paper and cardboard boxes. I have kept them there myself. Neatly
arranged, there is nothing to offend the eye.”
“Poirot,” I asked earnestly, “have you made up your mind about this
crime?”
“Yes—that is to say, I believe I know how it was committed.”
“Ah!”
“Unfortunately, I have no proof beyond my surmise, unless——” With
sudden energy, he caught me by the arm, and whirled me down the hall,
calling out in French in his excitement: “Mademoiselle Dorcas,
Mademoiselle Dorcas, un moment, s’il vous plaît!”
Dorcas, quite flurried by the noise, came hurrying out of the pantry.
“My good Dorcas, I have an idea—a little idea—if it should prove
justified, what magnificent chance! Tell me, on Monday, not Tuesday,
Dorcas, but Monday, the day before the tragedy, did anything go wrong
with Mrs. Inglethorp’s bell?”
Dorcas looked very surprised.
“Yes, sir, now you mention it, it did; though I don’t know how you came
to hear of it. A mouse, or some such, must have nibbled the wire
through. The man came and put it right on Tuesday morning.”
With a long drawn exclamation of ecstasy, Poirot led the way back to
the morning-room.
“See you, one should not ask for outside proof—no, reason should be
enough. But the flesh is weak, it is consolation to find that one is on
the right track. Ah, my friend, I am like a giant refreshed. I run! I
leap!”
And, in very truth, run and leap he did, gambolling wildly down the
stretch of lawn outside the long window.
“What is your remarkable little friend doing?” asked a voice behind me,
and I turned to find Mary Cavendish at my elbow. She smiled, and so did
I. “What is it all about?”
“Really, I can’t tell you. He asked Dorcas some question about a bell,
and appeared so delighted with her answer that he is capering about as
you see!”
Mary laughed.
“How ridiculous! He’s going out of the gate. Isn’t he coming back
to-day?”
“I don’t know. I’ve given up trying to guess what he’ll do next.”
“Is he quite mad, Mr. Hastings?”
“I honestly don’t know. Sometimes, I feel sure he is as mad as a
hatter; and then, just as he is at his maddest, I find there is method
in his madness.”
“I see.”
In spite of her laugh, Mary was looking thoughtful this morning. She
seemed grave, almost sad.
It occurred to me that it would be a good opportunity to tackle her on
the subject of Cynthia. I began rather tactfully, I thought, but I
had not gone far before she stopped me authoritatively.
“You are an excellent advocate, I have no doubt, Mr. Hastings, but in
this case your talents are quite thrown away. Cynthia will run no risk
of encountering any unkindness from me.”
I began to stammer feebly that I hoped she hadn’t thought—— But again
she stopped me, and her words were so unexpected that they quite drove
Cynthia, and her troubles, out of my mind.
“Mr. Hastings,” she said, “do you think I and my husband are happy
together?”
I was considerably taken aback, and murmured something about it’s not
being my business to think anything of the sort.
“Well,” she said quietly, “whether it is your business or not, I will
tell you that we are not happy.”
I said nothing, for I saw that she had not finished.
She began slowly, walking up and down the room, her head a little bent,
and that slim, supple figure of hers swaying gently as she walked. She
stopped suddenly, and looked up at me.
“You don’t know anything about me, do you?” she asked. “Where I come
from, who I was before I married John—anything, in fact? Well, I will
tell you. I will make a father confessor of you. You are kind, I
think—yes, I am sure you are kind.”
Somehow, I was not quite as elated as I might have been. I remembered
that Cynthia had begun her confidences in much the same way. Besides, a
father confessor should be elderly, it is not at all the role for a
young man.
“My father was English,” said Mrs. Cavendish, “but my mother was a
Russian.”
“Ah,” I said, “now I understand——”
“Understand what?”
“A hint of something foreign—different—that there has always been about
you.”
“My mother was very beautiful, I believe. I don’t know, because I never
saw her. She died when I was quite a little child. I believe there was
some tragedy connected with her death—she took an overdose of some
sleeping draught by mistake. However that may be, my father was
broken-hearted. Shortly afterwards, he went into the Consular Service.
Everywhere he went, I went with him. When I was twenty-three, I had
been nearly all over the world. It was a splendid life—I loved it.”
There was a smile on her face, and her head was thrown back. She seemed
living in the memory of those old glad days.
“Then my father died. He left me very badly off. I had to go and live
with some old aunts in Yorkshire.” She shuddered. “You will understand
me when I say that it was a deadly life for a girl brought up as I had
been. The narrowness, the deadly monotony of it, almost drove me mad.”
She paused a minute, and added in a different tone: “And then I met
John Cavendish.”
“Yes?”
“You can imagine that, from my aunts’ point of view, it was a very good
match for me. But I can honestly say it was not this fact which weighed
with me. No, he was simply a way of escape from the insufferable
monotony of my life.”
I said nothing, and after a moment, she went on:
“Don’t misunderstand me. I was quite honest with him. I told him, what
was true, that I liked him very much, that I hoped to come to like him
more, but that I was not in any way what the world calls ‘in love’ with
him. He declared that that satisfied him, and so—we were married.”
She waited a long time, a little frown had gathered on her forehead.
She seemed to be looking back earnestly into those past days.
“I think—I am sure—he cared for me at first. But I suppose we were not
well matched. Almost at once, we drifted apart. He—it is not a pleasing
thing for my pride, but it is the truth—tired of me very soon.” I must
have made some murmur of dissent, for she went on quickly: “Oh, yes, he
did! Not that it matters now—now that we’ve come to the parting of the
ways.”
“What do you mean?”
She answered quietly:
“I mean that I am not going to remain at Styles.”
“You and John are not going to live here?”
“John may live here, but I shall not.”
“You are going to leave him?”
“Yes.”
“But why?”
She paused a long time, and said at last:
“Perhaps—because I want to be—free!”
And, as she spoke, I had a sudden vision of broad spaces, virgin tracts
of forests, untrodden lands—and a realization of what freedom would
mean to such a nature as Mary Cavendish. I seemed to see her for a
moment as she was, a proud wild creature, as untamed by civilization as
some shy bird of the hills. A little cry broke from her lips:
“You don’t know, you don’t know, how this hateful place has been prison
to me!”
“I understand,” I said, “but—but don’t do anything rash.”
“Oh, rash!” Her voice mocked at my prudence.
Then suddenly I said a thing I could have bitten out my tongue for:
“You know that Dr. Bauerstein has been arrested?”
An instant coldness passed like a mask over her face, blotting out all
expression.
“John was so kind as to break that to me this morning.”
“Well, what do you think?” I asked feebly.
“Of what?”
“Of the arrest?”
“What should I think? Apparently he is a German spy; so the gardener
had told John.”
Her face and voice were absolutely cold and expressionless. Did she
care, or did she not?
She moved away a step or two, and fingered one of the flower vases.
“These are quite dead. I must do them again. Would you mind
moving—thank you, Mr. Hastings.” And she walked quietly past me out of
the window, with a cool little nod of dismissal.
No, surely she could not care for Bauerstein. No woman could act her
part with that icy unconcern.
Poirot did not make his appearance the following morning, and there was
no sign of the Scotland Yard men.
But, at lunch-time, there arrived a new piece of evidence—or rather
lack of evidence. We had vainly tried to trace the fourth letter, which
Mrs. Inglethorp had written on the evening preceding her death. Our
efforts having been in vain, we had abandoned the matter, hoping that
it might turn up of itself one day. And this is just what did happen,
in the shape of a communication, which arrived by the second post from
a firm of French music publishers, acknowledging Mrs. Inglethorp’s
cheque, and regretting they had been unable to trace a certain series
of Russian folksongs. So the last hope of solving the mystery, by means
of Mrs. Inglethorp’s correspondence on the fatal evening, had to be
abandoned.
Just before tea, I strolled down to tell Poirot of the new
disappointment, but found, to my annoyance, that he was once more out.
“Gone to London again?”
“Oh, no, monsieur, he has but taken the train to Tadminster. ‘To see a
young lady’s dispensary,’ he said.”
“Silly ass!” I ejaculated. “I told him Wednesday was the one day she
wasn’t there! Well, tell him to look us up to-morrow morning, will
you?”
“Certainly, monsieur.”
But, on the following day, no sign of Poirot. I was getting angry. He
was really treating us in the most cavalier fashion.
After lunch, Lawrence drew me aside, and asked if I was going down to
see him.
“No, I don’t think I shall. He can come up here if he wants to see us.”
“Oh!” Lawrence looked indeterminate. Something unusually nervous and
excited in his manner roused my curiosity.
“What is it?” I asked. “I could go if there’s anything special.”
“It’s nothing much, but—well, if you are going, will you tell him——” he
dropped his voice to a whisper—“I think I’ve found the extra
coffee-cup!”
I had almost forgotten that enigmatical message of Poirot’s, but now my
curiosity was aroused afresh.
Lawrence would say no more, so I decided that I would descend from my
high horse, and once more seek out Poirot at Leastways Cottage.
This time I was received with a smile. Monsieur Poirot was within.
Would I mount? I mounted accordingly.
Poirot was sitting by the table, his head buried in his hands. He
sprang up at my entrance.
“What is it?” I asked solicitously. “You are not ill, I trust?”
“No, no, not ill. But I decide an affair of great moment.”
“Whether to catch the criminal or not?” I asked facetiously.
But, to my great surprise, Poirot nodded gravely.
“‘To speak or not to speak,’ as your so great Shakespeare says, ‘that
is the question.’”
I did not trouble to correct the quotation.
“You are not serious, Poirot?”
“I am of the most serious. For the most serious of all things hangs in
the balance.”
“And that is?”
“A woman’s happiness, mon ami,” he said gravely.
I did not quite know what to say.
“The moment has come,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “and I do not know
what to do. For, see you, it is a big stake for which I play. No one
but I, Hercule Poirot, would attempt it!” And he tapped himself proudly
on the breast.
After pausing a few minutes respectfully, so as not to spoil his
effect, I gave him Lawrence’s message.
“Aha!” he cried. “So he has found the extra coffee-cup. That is good.
He has more intelligence than would appear, this long-faced Monsieur
Lawrence of yours!”
I did not myself think very highly of Lawrence’s intelligence; but I
forebore to contradict Poirot, and gently took him to task for
forgetting my instructions as to which were Cynthia’s days off.
“It is true. I have the head of a sieve. However, the other young lady
was most kind. She was sorry for my disappointment, and showed me
everything in the kindest way.”
“Oh, well, that’s all right, then, and you must go to tea with Cynthia
another day.”
I told him about the letter.
“I am sorry for that,” he said. “I always had hopes of that letter. But
no, it was not to be. This affair must all be unravelled from within.”
He tapped his forehead. “These little grey cells. It is ‘up to them’—as
you say over here.” Then, suddenly, he asked: “Are you a judge of
finger-marks, my friend?”
“No,” I said, rather surprised, “I know that there are no two
finger-marks alike, but that’s as far as my science goes.”
“Exactly.”
He unlocked a little drawer, and took out some photographs which he
laid on the table.
“I have numbered them, 1, 2, 3. Will you describe them to me?”
I studied the proofs attentively.
“All greatly magnified, I see. No. 1, I should say, are a man’s
finger-prints; thumb and first finger. No. 2 are a lady’s; they are
much smaller, and quite different in every way. No. 3”—I paused for
some time—“there seem to be a lot of confused finger-marks, but here,
very distinctly, are No. 1’s.”
“Overlapping the others?”
“Yes.”
“You recognize them beyond fail?”
“Oh, yes; they are identical.”
Poirot nodded, and gently taking the photographs from me locked them up
again.
“I suppose,” I said, “that as usual, you are not going to explain?”
“On the contrary. No. 1 were the finger-prints of Monsieur Lawrence.
No. 2 were those of Mademoiselle Cynthia. They are not important. I
merely obtained them for comparison. No. 3 is a little more
complicated.”
“Yes?”
“It is, as you see, highly magnified. You may have noticed a sort of
blur extending all across the picture. I will not describe to you the
special apparatus, dusting powder, etc., which I used. It is a
well-known process to the police, and by means of it you can obtain a
photograph of the finger-prints of any object in a very short space of
time. Well, my friend, you have seen the finger-marks—it remains to
tell you the particular object on which they had been left.”
“Go on—I am really excited.”
“Eh bien! Photo No. 3 represents the highly magnified surface of a
tiny bottle in the top poison cupboard of the dispensary in the Red
Cross Hospital at Tadminster—which sounds like the house that Jack
built!”
“Good heavens!” I exclaimed. “But what were Lawrence Cavendish’s
finger-marks doing on it? He never went near the poison cupboard the
day we were there!”
“Oh, yes, he did!”
“Impossible! We were all together the whole time.”
Poirot shook his head.
“No, my friend, there was a moment when you were not all together.
There was a moment when you could not have been all together, or it
would not have been necessary to call to Monsieur Lawrence to come and
join you on the balcony.”
“I’d forgotten that,” I admitted. “But it was only for a moment.”
“Long enough.”
“Long enough for what?”
Poirot’s smile became rather enigmatical.
“Long enough for a gentleman who had once studied medicine to gratify a
very natural interest and curiosity.”
Our eyes met. Poirot’s were pleasantly vague. He got up and hummed a
little tune. I watched him suspiciously.
“Poirot,” I said, “what was in this particular little bottle?”
Poirot looked out of the window.
“Hydro-chloride of strychnine,” he said, over his shoulder, continuing
to hum.
“Good heavens!” I said it quite quietly. I was not surprised. I had
expected that answer.
“They use the pure hydro-chloride of strychnine very little—only
occasionally for pills. It is the official solution, Liq. Strychnine
Hydro-clor. that is used in most medicines. That is why the
finger-marks have remained undisturbed since then.”
“How did you manage to take this photograph?”
“I dropped my hat from the balcony,” explained Poirot simply. “Visitors
were not permitted below at that hour, so, in spite of my many
apologies, Mademoiselle Cynthia’s colleague had to go down and fetch it
for me.”
“Then you knew what you were going to find?”
“No, not at all. I merely realized that it was possible, from your
story, for Monsieur Lawrence to go to the poison cupboard. The
possibility had to be confirmed, or eliminated.”
“Poirot,” I said, “your gaiety does not deceive me. This is a very
important discovery.”
“I do not know,” said Poirot. “But one thing does strike me. No doubt
it has struck you too.”
“What is that?”
“Why, that there is altogether too much strychnine about this case.
This is the third time we run up against it. There was strychnine in
Mrs. Inglethorp’s tonic. There is the strychnine sold across the
counter at Styles St. Mary by Mace. Now we have more strychnine,
handled by one of the household. It is confusing; and, as you know, I
do not like confusion.”
Before I could reply, one of the other Belgians opened the door and
stuck his head in.
“There is a lady below, asking for Mr Hastings.”
“A lady?”
I jumped up. Poirot followed me down the narrow stairs. Mary Cavendish
was standing in the doorway.
“I have been visiting an old woman in the village,” she explained, “and
as Lawrence told me you were with Monsieur Poirot I thought I would
call for you.”
“Alas, madame,” said Poirot, “I thought you had come to honour me with
a visit!”
“I will some day, if you ask me,” she promised him, smiling.
“That is well. If you should need a father confessor, madame”—she
started ever so slightly—“remember, Papa Poirot is always at your
service.”
She stared at him for a few minutes, as though seeking to read some
deeper meaning into his words. Then she turned abruptly away.
“Come, will you not walk back with us too, Monsieur Poirot?”
“Enchanted, madame.”
All the way to Styles, Mary talked fast and feverishly. It struck me
that in some way she was nervous of Poirot’s eyes.
The weather had broken, and the sharp wind was almost autumnal in its
shrewishness. Mary shivered a little, and buttoned her black sports
coat closer. The wind through the trees made a mournful noise, like
some great giant sighing.
We walked up to the great door of Styles, and at once the knowledge
came to us that something was wrong.
Dorcas came running out to meet us. She was crying and wringing her
hands. I was aware of other servants huddled together in the
background, all eyes and ears.
“Oh, m’am! Oh, m’am! I don’t know how to tell you——”
“What is it, Dorcas?” I asked impatiently. “Tell us at once.”
“It’s those wicked detectives. They’ve arrested him—they’ve arrested
Mr. Cavendish!”
“Arrested Lawrence?” I gasped.
I saw a strange look come into Dorcas’s eyes.
“No, sir. Not Mr. Lawrence—Mr. John.”
Behind me, with a wild cry, Mary Cavendish fell heavily against me, and
as I turned to catch her I met the quiet triumph in Poirot’s eyes.
CHAPTER XI. THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTION
The trial of John Cavendish for the murder of his stepmother took place
two months later.
Of the intervening weeks I will say little, but my admiration and
sympathy went out unfeignedly to Mary Cavendish. She ranged herself
passionately on her husband’s side, scorning the mere idea of his
guilt, and fought for him tooth and nail.
I expressed my admiration to Poirot, and he nodded thoughtfully.
“Yes, she is of those women who show at their best in adversity. It
brings out all that is sweetest and truest in them. Her pride and her
jealousy have——”
“Jealousy?” I queried.
“Yes. Have you not realized that she is an unusually jealous woman? As
I was saying, her pride and jealousy have been laid aside. She thinks
of nothing but her husband, and the terrible fate that is hanging over
him.”
He spoke very feelingly, and I looked at him earnestly, remembering
that last afternoon, when he had been deliberating whether or not to
speak. With his tenderness for “a woman’s happiness,” I felt glad that
the decision had been taken out of his hands.
“Even now,” I said, “I can hardly believe it. You see, up to the very
last minute, I thought it was Lawrence!”
Poirot grinned.
“I know you did.”
“But John! My old friend John!”
“Every murderer is probably somebody’s old friend,” observed Poirot
philosophically. “You cannot mix up sentiment and reason.”
“I must say I think you might have given me a hint.”
“Perhaps, mon ami, I did not do so, just because he was your old
friend.”
I was rather disconcerted by this, remembering how I had busily passed
on to John what I believed to be Poirot’s views concerning Bauerstein.
He, by the way, had been acquitted of the charge brought against him.
Nevertheless, although he had been too clever for them this time, and
the charge of espionage could not be brought home to him, his wings
were pretty well clipped for the future.
I asked Poirot whether he thought John would be condemned. To my
intense surprise, he replied that, on the contrary, he was extremely
likely to be acquitted.
“But, Poirot——” I protested.
“Oh, my friend, have I not said to you all along that I have no proofs.
It is one thing to know that a man is guilty, it is quite another
matter to prove him so. And, in this case, there is terribly little
evidence. That is the whole trouble. I, Hercule Poirot, know, but I
lack the last link in my chain. And unless I can find that missing
link——” He shook his head gravely.
“When did you first suspect John Cavendish?” I asked, after a minute or
two.
“Did you not suspect him at all?”
“No, indeed.”
“Not after that fragment of conversation you overheard between Mrs.
Cavendish and her mother-in-law, and her subsequent lack of frankness
at the inquest?”
“No.”
“Did you not put two and two together, and reflect that if it was not
Alfred Inglethorp who was quarrelling with his wife—and you remember,
he strenuously denied it at the inquest—it must be either Lawrence or
John. Now, if it was Lawrence, Mary Cavendish’s conduct was just as
inexplicable. But if, on the other hand, it was John, the whole thing
was explained quite naturally.”
“So,” I cried, a light breaking in upon me, “it was John who quarrelled
with his mother that afternoon?”
“Exactly.”
“And you have known this all along?”
“Certainly. Mrs. Cavendish’s behaviour could only be explained that
way.”
“And yet you say he may be acquitted?”
Poirot shrugged his shoulders.
“Certainly I do. At the police court proceedings, we shall hear the
case for the prosecution, but in all probability his solicitors will
advise him to reserve his defence. That will be sprung upon us at the
trial. And—ah, by the way, I have a word of caution to give you, my
friend. I must not appear in the case.”
“What?”
“No. Officially, I have nothing to do with it. Until I have found that
last link in my chain, I must remain behind the scenes. Mrs. Cavendish
must think I am working for her husband, not against him.”
“I say, that’s playing it a bit low down,” I protested.
“Not at all. We have to deal with a most clever and unscrupulous man,
and we must use any means in our power—otherwise he will slip through
our fingers. That is why I have been careful to remain in the
background. All the discoveries have been made by Japp, and Japp will
take all the credit. If I am called upon to give evidence at all”—he
smiled broadly—“it will probably be as a witness for the defence.”
I could hardly believe my ears.
“It is quite en règle,” continued Poirot. “Strangely enough, I can
give evidence that will demolish one contention of the prosecution.”
“Which one?”
“The one that relates to the destruction of the will. John Cavendish
did not destroy that will.”
Poirot was a true prophet. I will not go into the details of the police
court proceedings, as it involves many tiresome repetitions. I will
merely state baldly that John Cavendish reserved his defence, and was
duly committed for trial.
September found us all in London. Mary took a house in Kensington,
Poirot being included in the family party.
I myself had been given a job at the War Office, so was able to see
them continually.
As the weeks went by, the state of Poirot’s nerves grew worse and
worse. That “last link” he talked about was still lacking. Privately, I
hoped it might remain so, for what happiness could there be for Mary,
if John were not acquitted?
On September 15th John Cavendish appeared in the dock at the Old
Bailey, charged with “The Wilful Murder of Emily Agnes Inglethorp,” and
pleaded “Not Guilty.”
Sir Ernest Heavywether, the famous K.C., had been engaged to defend
him.
Mr. Philips, K.C., opened the case for the Crown.
The murder, he said, was a most premeditated and cold-blooded one. It
was neither more nor less than the deliberate poisoning of a fond and
trusting woman by the stepson to whom she had been more than a mother.
Ever since his boyhood, she had supported him. He and his wife had
lived at Styles Court in every luxury, surrounded by her care and
attention. She had been their kind and generous benefactress.
He proposed to call witnesses to show how the prisoner, a profligate
and spendthrift, had been at the end of his financial tether, and had
also been carrying on an intrigue with a certain Mrs. Raikes, a
neighbouring farmer’s wife. This having come to his stepmother’s ears,
she taxed him with it on the afternoon before her death, and a quarrel
ensued, part of which was overheard. On the previous day, the prisoner
had purchased strychnine at the village chemist’s shop, wearing a
disguise by means of which he hoped to throw the onus of the crime upon
another man—to wit, Mrs. Inglethorp’s husband, of whom he had been
bitterly jealous. Luckily for Mr. Inglethorp, he had been able to
produce an unimpeachable alibi.
On the afternoon of July 17th, continued Counsel, immediately after the
quarrel with her son, Mrs. Inglethorp made a new will. This will was
found destroyed in the grate of her bedroom the following morning, but
evidence had come to light which showed that it had been drawn up in
favour of her husband. Deceased had already made a will in his favour
before her marriage, but—and Mr. Philips wagged an expressive
forefinger—the prisoner was not aware of that. What had induced the
deceased to make a fresh will, with the old one still extant, he could
not say. She was an old lady, and might possibly have forgotten the
former one; or—this seemed to him more likely—she may have had an idea
that it was revoked by her marriage, as there had been some
conversation on the subject. Ladies were not always very well versed in
legal knowledge. She had, about a year before, executed a will in
favour of the prisoner. He would call evidence to show that it was the
prisoner who ultimately handed his stepmother her coffee on the fatal
night. Later in the evening, he had sought admission to her room, on
which occasion, no doubt, he found an opportunity of destroying the
will which, as far as he knew, would render the one in his favour
valid.
The prisoner had been arrested in consequence of the discovery, in his
room, by Detective Inspector Japp—a most brilliant officer—of the
identical phial of strychnine which had been sold at the village
chemist’s to the supposed Mr. Inglethorp on the day before the murder.
It would be for the jury to decide whether or not these damning facts
constituted an overwhelming proof of the prisoner’s guilt.
And, subtly implying that a jury which did not so decide, was quite
unthinkable, Mr. Philips sat down and wiped his forehead.
The first witnesses for the prosecution were mostly those who had been
called at the inquest, the medical evidence being again taken first.
Sir Ernest Heavywether, who was famous all over England for the
unscrupulous manner in which he bullied witnesses, only asked two
questions.
“I take it, Dr. Bauerstein, that strychnine, as a drug, acts quickly?”
“Yes.”
“And that you are unable to account for the delay in this case?”
“Yes.”
“Thank you.”
Mr. Mace identified the phial handed him by Counsel as that sold by him
to “Mr. Inglethorp.” Pressed, he admitted that he only knew Mr.
Inglethorp by sight. He had never spoken to him. The witness was not
cross-examined.
Alfred Inglethorp was called, and denied having purchased the poison.
He also denied having quarrelled with his wife. Various witnesses
testified to the accuracy of these statements.
The gardeners’ evidence, as to the witnessing of the will was taken,
and then Dorcas was called.
Dorcas, faithful to her “young gentlemen,” denied strenuously that it
could have been John’s voice she heard, and resolutely declared, in the
teeth of everything, that it was Mr. Inglethorp who had been in the
boudoir with her mistress. A rather wistful smile passed across the
face of the prisoner in the dock. He knew only too well how useless her
gallant defiance was, since it was not the object of the defence to
deny this point. Mrs. Cavendish, of course, could not be called upon to
give evidence against her husband.
After various questions on other matters, Mr. Philips asked:
“In the month of June last, do you remember a parcel arriving for Mr.
Lawrence Cavendish from Parkson’s?”
Dorcas shook her head.
“I don’t remember, sir. It may have done, but Mr. Lawrence was away
from home part of June.”
“In the event of a parcel arriving for him whilst he was away, what
would be done with it?”
“It would either be put in his room or sent on after him.”
“By you?”
“No, sir, I should leave it on the hall table. It would be Miss Howard
who would attend to anything like that.”
Evelyn Howard was called and, after being examined on other points, was
questioned as to the parcel.
“Don’t remember. Lots of parcels come. Can’t remember one special one.”
“You do not know if it was sent after Mr. Lawrence Cavendish to Wales,
or whether it was put in his room?”
“Don’t think it was sent after him. Should have remembered it if it
was.”
“Supposing a parcel arrived addressed to Mr. Lawrence Cavendish, and
afterwards it disappeared, should you remark its absence?”
“No, don’t think so. I should think someone had taken charge of it.”
“I believe, Miss Howard, that it was you who found this sheet of brown
paper?” He held up the same dusty piece which Poirot and I had examined
in the morning-room at Styles.
“Yes, I did.”
“How did you come to look for it?”
“The Belgian detective who was employed on the case asked me to search
for it.”
“Where did you eventually discover it?”
“On the top of—of—a wardrobe.”
“On top of the prisoner’s wardrobe?”
“I—I believe so.”
“Did you not find it yourself?”
“Yes.”
“Then you must know where you found it?”
“Yes, it was on the prisoner’s wardrobe.”
“That is better.”
An assistant from Parkson’s, Theatrical Costumiers, testified that on
June 29th, they had supplied a black beard to Mr. L. Cavendish, as
requested. It was ordered by letter, and a postal order was enclosed.
No, they had not kept the letter. All transactions were entered in
their books. They had sent the beard, as directed, to “L. Cavendish,
Esq., Styles Court.”
Sir Ernest Heavywether rose ponderously.
“Where was the letter written from?”
“From Styles Court.”
“The same address to which you sent the parcel?”
“Yes.”
“And the letter came from there?”
“Yes.”
Like a beast of prey, Heavywether fell upon him:
“How do you know?”
“I—I don’t understand.”
“How do you know that letter came from Styles? Did you notice the
postmark?”
“No—but——”
“Ah, you did not notice the postmark! And yet you affirm so
confidently that it came from Styles. It might, in fact, have been any
postmark?”
“Y—es.”
“In fact, the letter, though written on stamped notepaper, might have
been posted from anywhere? From Wales, for instance?”
The witness admitted that such might be the case, and Sir Ernest
signified that he was satisfied.
Elizabeth Wells, second housemaid at Styles, stated that after she had
gone to bed she remembered that she had bolted the front door, instead
of leaving it on the latch as Mr. Inglethorp had requested. She had
accordingly gone downstairs again to rectify her error. Hearing a
slight noise in the West wing, she had peeped along the passage, and
had seen Mr. John Cavendish knocking at Mrs. Inglethorp’s door.
Sir Ernest Heavywether made short work of her, and under his unmerciful
bullying she contradicted herself hopelessly, and Sir Ernest sat down
again with a satisfied smile on his face.
With the evidence of Annie, as to the candle grease on the floor, and
as to seeing the prisoner take the coffee into the boudoir, the
proceedings were adjourned until the following day.
As we went home, Mary Cavendish spoke bitterly against the prosecuting
counsel.
“That hateful man! What a net he has drawn around my poor John! How he
twisted every little fact until he made it seem what it wasn’t!”
“Well,” I said consolingly, “it will be the other way about to-morrow.”
“Yes,” she said meditatively; then suddenly dropped her voice. “Mr.
Hastings, you do not think—surely it could not have been Lawrence—Oh,
no, that could not be!”
But I myself was puzzled, and as soon as I was alone with Poirot I
asked him what he thought Sir Ernest was driving at.
“Ah!” said Poirot appreciatively. “He is a clever man, that Sir
Ernest.”
“Do you think he believes Lawrence guilty?”
“I do not think he believes or cares anything! No, what he is trying
for is to create such confusion in the minds of the jury that they are
divided in their opinion as to which brother did it. He is endeavouring
to make out that there is quite as much evidence against Lawrence as
against John—and I am not at all sure that he will not succeed.”
Detective-inspector Japp was the first witness called when the trial
was reopened, and gave his evidence succinctly and briefly. After
relating the earlier events, he proceeded:
“Acting on information received, Superintendent Summerhaye and myself
searched the prisoner’s room, during his temporary absence from the
house. In his chest of drawers, hidden beneath some underclothing, we
found: first, a pair of gold-rimmed pince-nez similar to those worn by
Mr. Inglethorp”—these were exhibited—“secondly, this phial.”
The phial was that already recognized by the chemist’s assistant, a
tiny bottle of blue glass, containing a few grains of a white
crystalline powder, and labelled: “Strychnine Hydro-chloride. POISON.”
A fresh piece of evidence discovered by the detectives since the police
court proceedings was a long, almost new piece of blotting-paper. It
had been found in Mrs. Inglethorp’s cheque book, and on being reversed
at a mirror, showed clearly the words: “. . . erything of which I die
possessed I leave to my beloved husband Alfred Ing...” This placed
beyond question the fact that the destroyed will had been in favour of
the deceased lady’s husband. Japp then produced the charred fragment of
paper recovered from the grate, and this, with the discovery of the
beard in the attic, completed his evidence.
But Sir Ernest’s cross-examination was yet to come.
“What day was it when you searched the prisoner’s room?”
“Tuesday, the 24th of July.”
“Exactly a week after the tragedy?”
“Yes.”
“You found these two objects, you say, in the chest of drawers. Was the
drawer unlocked?”
“Yes.”
“Does it not strike you as unlikely that a man who had committed a
crime should keep the evidence of it in an unlocked drawer for anyone
to find?”
“He might have stowed them there in a hurry.”
“But you have just said it was a whole week since the crime. He would
have had ample time to remove them and destroy them.”
“Perhaps.”
“There is no perhaps about it. Would he, or would he not have had
plenty of time to remove and destroy them?”
“Yes.”
“Was the pile of underclothes under which the things were hidden heavy
or light?”
“Heavyish.”
“In other words, it was winter underclothing. Obviously, the prisoner
would not be likely to go to that drawer?”
“Perhaps not.”
“Kindly answer my question. Would the prisoner, in the hottest week of
a hot summer, be likely to go to a drawer containing winter
underclothing. Yes, or no?”
“No.”
“In that case, is it not possible that the articles in question might
have been put there by a third person, and that the prisoner was quite
unaware of their presence?”
“I should not think it likely.”
“But it is possible?”
“Yes.”
“That is all.”
More evidence followed. Evidence as to the financial difficulties in
which the prisoner had found himself at the end of July. Evidence as to
his intrigue with Mrs. Raikes—poor Mary, that must have been bitter
hearing for a woman of her pride. Evelyn Howard had been right in her
facts, though her animosity against Alfred Inglethorp had caused her to
jump to the conclusion that he was the person concerned.
Lawrence Cavendish was then put into the box. In a low voice, in answer
to Mr. Philips’ questions, he denied having ordered anything from
Parkson’s in June. In fact, on June 29th, he had been staying away, in
Wales.
Instantly, Sir Ernest’s chin was shooting pugnaciously forward.
“You deny having ordered a black beard from Parkson’s on June 29th?”
“I do.”
“Ah! In the event of anything happening to your brother, who will
inherit Styles Court?”
The brutality of the question called a flush to Lawrence’s pale face.
The judge gave vent to a faint murmur of disapprobation, and the
prisoner in the dock leant forward angrily.
Heavywether cared nothing for his client’s anger.
“Answer my question, if you please.”
“I suppose,” said Lawrence quietly, “that I should.”
“What do you mean by you ‘suppose’? Your brother has no children. You
would inherit it, wouldn’t you?”
“Yes.”
“Ah, that’s better,” said Heavywether, with ferocious geniality. “And
you’d inherit a good slice of money too, wouldn’t you?”
“Really, Sir Ernest,” protested the judge, “these questions are not
relevant.”
Sir Ernest bowed, and having shot his arrow proceeded.
“On Tuesday, the 17th July, you went, I believe, with another guest, to
visit the dispensary at the Red Cross Hospital in Tadminster?”
“Yes.”
“Did you—while you happened to be alone for a few seconds—unlock the
poison cupboard, and examine some of the bottles?”
“I—I—may have done so.”
“I put it to you that you did do so?”
“Yes.”
Sir Ernest fairly shot the next question at him.
“Did you examine one bottle in particular?”
“No, I do not think so.”
“Be careful, Mr. Cavendish. I am referring to a little bottle of
Hydro-chloride of Strychnine.”
Lawrence was turning a sickly greenish colour.
“N—o—I am sure I didn’t.”
“Then how do you account for the fact that you left the unmistakable
impress of your finger-prints on it?”
The bullying manner was highly efficacious with a nervous disposition.
“I—I suppose I must have taken up the bottle.”
“I suppose so too! Did you abstract any of the contents of the bottle?”
“Certainly not.”
“Then why did you take it up?”
“I once studied to be a doctor. Such things naturally interest me.”
“Ah! So poisons ‘naturally interest’ you, do they? Still, you waited to
be alone before gratifying that ‘interest’ of yours?”
“That was pure chance. If the others had been there, I should have done
just the same.”
“Still, as it happens, the others were not there?”
“No, but——”
“In fact, during the whole afternoon, you were only alone for a couple
of minutes, and it happened—I say, it happened—to be during those two
minutes that you displayed your ‘natural interest’ in Hydro-chloride of
Strychnine?”
Lawrence stammered pitiably.
“I—I——”
With a satisfied and expressive countenance, Sir Ernest observed:
“I have nothing more to ask you, Mr. Cavendish.”
This bit of cross-examination had caused great excitement in court. The
heads of the many fashionably attired women present were busily laid
together, and their whispers became so loud that the judge angrily
threatened to have the court cleared if there was not immediate
silence.
There was little more evidence. The hand-writing experts were called
upon for their opinion of the signature of “Alfred Inglethorp” in the
chemist’s poison register. They all declared unanimously that it was
certainly not his hand-writing, and gave it as their view that it might
be that of the prisoner disguised. Cross-examined, they admitted that
it might be the prisoner’s hand-writing cleverly counterfeited.
Sir Ernest Heavywether’s speech in opening the case for the defence was
not a long one, but it was backed by the full force of his emphatic
manner. Never, he said, in the course of his long experience, had he
known a charge of murder rest on slighter evidence. Not only was it
entirely circumstantial, but the greater part of it was practically
unproved. Let them take the testimony they had heard and sift it
impartially. The strychnine had been found in a drawer in the
prisoner’s room. That drawer was an unlocked one, as he had pointed
out, and he submitted that there was no evidence to prove that it was
the prisoner who had concealed the poison there. It was, in fact, a
wicked and malicious attempt on the part of some third person to fix
the crime on the prisoner. The prosecution had been unable to produce a
shred of evidence in support of their contention that it was the
prisoner who ordered the black beard from Parkson’s. The quarrel which
had taken place between prisoner and his stepmother was freely
admitted, but both it and his financial embarrassments had been grossly
exaggerated.
His learned friend—Sir Ernest nodded carelessly at Mr. Philips—had
stated that if the prisoner were an innocent man, he would have come
forward at the inquest to explain that it was he, and not Mr.
Inglethorp, who had been the participator in the quarrel. He thought
the facts had been misrepresented. What had actually occurred was this.
The prisoner, returning to the house on Tuesday evening, had been
authoritatively told that there had been a violent quarrel between Mr.
and Mrs. Inglethorp. No suspicion had entered the prisoner’s head that
anyone could possibly have mistaken his voice for that of Mr.
Inglethorp. He naturally concluded that his stepmother had had two
quarrels.
The prosecution averred that on Monday, July 16th, the prisoner had
entered the chemist’s shop in the village, disguised as Mr. Inglethorp.
The prisoner, on the contrary, was at that time at a lonely spot called
Marston’s Spinney, where he had been summoned by an anonymous note,
couched in blackmailing terms, and threatening to reveal certain
matters to his wife unless he complied with its demands. The prisoner
had, accordingly, gone to the appointed spot, and after waiting there
vainly for half an hour had returned home. Unfortunately, he had met
with no one on the way there or back who could vouch for the truth of
his story, but luckily he had kept the note, and it would be produced
as evidence.
As for the statement relating to the destruction of the will, the
prisoner had formerly practised at the Bar, and was perfectly well
aware that the will made in his favour a year before was automatically
revoked by his stepmother’s remarriage. He would call evidence to show
who did destroy the will, and it was possible that that might open up
quite a new view of the case.
Finally, he would point out to the jury that there was evidence against
other people besides John Cavendish. He would direct their attention to
the fact that the evidence against Mr. Lawrence Cavendish was quite as
strong, if not stronger than that against his brother.
He would now call the prisoner.
John acquitted himself well in the witness-box. Under Sir Ernest’s
skilful handling, he told his tale credibly and well. The anonymous
note received by him was produced, and handed to the jury to examine.
The readiness with which he admitted his financial difficulties, and
the disagreement with his stepmother, lent value to his denials.
At the close of his examination, he paused, and said:
“I should like to make one thing clear. I utterly reject and disapprove
of Sir Ernest Heavywether’s insinuations against my brother. My
brother, I am convinced, had no more to do with the crime than I have.”
Sir Ernest merely smiled, and noted with a sharp eye that John’s
protest had produced a very favourable impression on the jury.
Then the cross-examination began.
“I understand you to say that it never entered your head that the
witnesses at the inquest could possibly have mistaken your voice for
that of Mr. Inglethorp. Is not that very surprising?”
“No, I don’t think so. I was told there had been a quarrel between my
mother and Mr. Inglethorp, and it never occurred to me that such was
not really the case.”
“Not when the servant Dorcas repeated certain fragments of the
conversation—fragments which you must have recognized?”
“I did not recognize them.”
“Your memory must be unusually short!”
“No, but we were both angry, and, I think, said more than we meant. I
paid very little attention to my mother’s actual words.”
Mr. Philips’ incredulous sniff was a triumph of forensic skill. He
passed on to the subject of the note.
“You have produced this note very opportunely. Tell me, is there
nothing familiar about the hand-writing of it?”
“Not that I know of.”
“Do you not think that it bears a marked resemblance to your own
hand-writing—carelessly disguised?”
“No, I do not think so.”
“I put it to you that it is your own hand-writing!”
“No.”
“I put it to you that, anxious to prove an alibi, you conceived the
idea of a fictitious and rather incredible appointment, and wrote this
note yourself in order to bear out your statement!”
“No.”
“Is it not a fact that, at the time you claim to have been waiting
about at a solitary and unfrequented spot, you were really in the
chemist’s shop in Styles St. Mary, where you purchased strychnine in
the name of Alfred Inglethorp?”
“No, that is a lie.”
“I put it to you that, wearing a suit of Mr. Inglethorp’s clothes, with
a black beard trimmed to resemble his, you were there—and signed the
register in his name!”
“That is absolutely untrue.”
“Then I will leave the remarkable similarity of hand-writing between
the note, the register, and your own, to the consideration of the
jury,” said Mr. Philips, and sat down with the air of a man who has
done his duty, but who was nevertheless horrified by such deliberate
perjury.
After this, as it was growing late, the case was adjourned till Monday.
Poirot, I noticed, was looking profoundly discouraged. He had that
little frown between the eyes that I knew so well.
“What is it, Poirot?” I inquired.
“Ah, mon ami, things are going badly, badly.”
In spite of myself, my heart gave a leap of relief. Evidently there was
a likelihood of John Cavendish being acquitted.
When we reached the house, my little friend waved aside Mary’s offer of
tea.
“No, I thank you, madame. I will mount to my room.”
I followed him. Still frowning, he went across to the desk and took out
a small pack of patience cards. Then he drew up a chair to the table,
and, to my utter amazement, began solemnly to build card houses!
My jaw dropped involuntarily, and he said at once:
“No, mon ami, I am not in my second childhood! I steady my nerves,
that is all. This employment requires precision of the fingers. With
precision of the fingers goes precision of the brain. And never have I
needed that more than now!”
“What is the trouble?” I asked.
With a great thump on the table, Poirot demolished his carefully built
up edifice.
“It is this, mon ami! That I can build card houses seven stories
high, but I cannot”—thump—“find”—thump—“ that last link of which I
spoke to you.”
I could not quite tell what to say, so I held my peace, and he began
slowly building up the cards again, speaking in jerks as he did so.
“It is done—so! By placing—one card—on another—with
mathematical—precision!”
I watched the card house rising under his hands, story by story. He
never hesitated or faltered. It was really almost like a conjuring
trick.
“What a steady hand you’ve got,” I remarked. “I believe I’ve only seen
your hand shake once.”
“On an occasion when I was enraged, without doubt,” observed Poirot,
with great placidity.
“Yes indeed! You were in a towering rage. Do you remember? It was when
you discovered that the lock of the despatch-case in Mrs. Inglethorp’s
bedroom had been forced. You stood by the mantelpiece, twiddling the
things on it in your usual fashion, and your hand shook like a leaf! I
must say——”
But I stopped suddenly. For Poirot, uttering a hoarse and inarticulate
cry, again annihilated his masterpiece of cards, and putting his hands
over his eyes swayed backwards and forwards, apparently suffering the
keenest agony.
“Good heavens, Poirot!” I cried. “What is the matter? Are you taken
ill?”
“No, no,” he gasped. “It is—it is—that I have an idea!”
“Oh!” I exclaimed, much relieved. “One of your ‘little ideas’?”
“Ah, ma foi, no!” replied Poirot frankly. “This time it is an idea
gigantic! Stupendous! And you—you, my friend, have given it to me!”
Suddenly clasping me in his arms, he kissed me warmly on both cheeks,
and before I had recovered from my surprise ran headlong from the room.
Mary Cavendish entered at that moment.
“What is the matter with Monsieur Poirot? He rushed past me crying
out: ‘A garage! For the love of Heaven, direct me to a garage, madame!’
And, before I could answer, he had dashed out into the street.”
I hurried to the window. True enough, there he was, tearing down the
street, hatless, and gesticulating as he went. I turned to Mary with a
gesture of despair.
“He’ll be stopped by a policeman in another minute. There he goes,
round the corner!”
Our eyes met, and we stared helplessly at one another.
“What can be the matter?”
I shook my head.
“I don’t know. He was building card houses, when suddenly he said he
had an idea, and rushed off as you saw.”
“Well,” said Mary, “I expect he will be back before dinner.”
But night fell, and Poirot had not returned.
CHAPTER XII. THE LAST LINK
Poirot’s abrupt departure had intrigued us all greatly. Sunday morning
wore away, and still he did not reappear. But about three o’clock a
ferocious and prolonged hooting outside drove us to the window, to see
Poirot alighting from a car, accompanied by Japp and Summerhaye. The
little man was transformed. He radiated an absurd complacency. He bowed
with exaggerated respect to Mary Cavendish.
“Madame, I have your permission to hold a little réunion in the
salon? It is necessary for everyone to attend.”
Mary smiled sadly.
“You know, Monsieur Poirot, that you have carte blanche in every
way.”
“You are too amiable, madame.”
Still beaming, Poirot marshalled us all into the drawing-room, bringing
forward chairs as he did so.
“Miss Howard—here. Mademoiselle Cynthia. Monsieur Lawrence. The good
Dorcas. And Annie. Bien! We must delay our proceedings a few minutes
until Mr. Inglethorp arrives. I have sent him a note.”
Miss Howard rose immediately from her seat.
“If that man comes into the house, I leave it!”
“No, no!” Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.
Finally Miss Howard consented to return to her chair. A few minutes
later Alfred Inglethorp entered the room.
The company once assembled, Poirot rose from his seat with the air of a
popular lecturer, and bowed politely to his audience.
“Messieurs, mesdames, as you all know, I was called in by Monsieur
John Cavendish to investigate this case. I at once examined the bedroom
of the deceased which, by the advice of the doctors, had been kept
locked, and was consequently exactly as it had been when the tragedy
occurred. I found: first, a fragment of green material; second, a stain
on the carpet near the window, still damp; thirdly, an empty box of
bromide powders.
“To take the fragment of green material first, I found it caught in the
bolt of the communicating door between that room and the adjoining one
occupied by Mademoiselle Cynthia. I handed the fragment over to the
police who did not consider it of much importance. Nor did they
recognize it for what it was—a piece torn from a green land armlet.”
There was a little stir of excitement.
“Now there was only one person at Styles who worked on the land—Mrs.
Cavendish. Therefore it must have been Mrs. Cavendish who entered the
deceased’s room through the door communicating with Mademoiselle
Cynthia’s room.”
“But that door was bolted on the inside!” I cried.
“When I examined the room, yes. But in the first place we have only her
word for it, since it was she who tried that particular door and
reported it fastened. In the ensuing confusion she would have had ample
opportunity to shoot the bolt across. I took an early opportunity of
verifying my conjectures. To begin with, the fragment corresponds
exactly with a tear in Mrs. Cavendish’s armlet. Also, at the inquest,
Mrs. Cavendish declared that she had heard, from her own room, the fall
of the table by the bed. I took an early opportunity of testing that
statement by stationing my friend Monsieur Hastings in the left wing of
the building, just outside Mrs. Cavendish’s door. I myself, in company
with the police, went to the deceased’s room, and whilst there I,
apparently accidentally, knocked over the table in question, but found
that, as I had expected, Monsieur Hastings had heard no sound at all.
This confirmed my belief that Mrs. Cavendish was not speaking the truth
when she declared that she had been dressing in her room at the time of
the tragedy. In fact, I was convinced that, far from having been in her
own room, Mrs. Cavendish was actually in the deceased’s room when the
alarm was given.”
I shot a quick glance at Mary. She was very pale, but smiling.
“I proceeded to reason on that assumption. Mrs. Cavendish is in her
mother-in-law’s room. We will say that she is seeking for something and
has not yet found it. Suddenly Mrs. Inglethorp awakens and is seized
with an alarming paroxysm. She flings out her arm, overturning the bed
table, and then pulls desperately at the bell. Mrs. Cavendish,
startled, drops her candle, scattering the grease on the carpet. She
picks it up, and retreats quickly to Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room,
closing the door behind her. She hurries out into the passage, for the
servants must not find her where she is. But it is too late! Already
footsteps are echoing along the gallery which connects the two wings.
What can she do? Quick as thought, she hurries back to the young girl’s
room, and starts shaking her awake. The hastily aroused household come
trooping down the passage. They are all busily battering at Mrs.
Inglethorp’s door. It occurs to nobody that Mrs. Cavendish has not
arrived with the rest, but—and this is significant—I can find no one
who saw her come from the other wing.” He looked at Mary Cavendish. “Am
I right, madame?”
She bowed her head.
“Quite right, monsieur. You understand that, if I had thought I would
do my husband any good by revealing these facts, I would have done so.
But it did not seem to me to bear upon the question of his guilt or
innocence.”
“In a sense, that is correct, madame. But it cleared my mind of many
misconceptions, and left me free to see other facts in their true
significance.”
“The will!” cried Lawrence. “Then it was you, Mary, who destroyed the
will?”
She shook her head, and Poirot shook his also.
“No,” he said quietly. “There is only one person who could possibly
have destroyed that will—Mrs. Inglethorp herself!”
“Impossible!” I exclaimed. “She had only made it out that very
afternoon!”
“Nevertheless, mon ami, it was Mrs. Inglethorp. Because, in no other
way can you account for the fact that, on one of the hottest days of
the year, Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire to be lighted in her room.”
I gave a gasp. What idiots we had been never to think of that fire as
being incongruous! Poirot was continuing:
“The temperature on that day, messieurs, was 80 degrees in the shade.
Yet Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire! Why? Because she wished to destroy
something, and could think of no other way. You will remember that, in
consequence of the War economics practiced at Styles, no waste paper
was thrown away. There was therefore no means of destroying a thick
document such as a will. The moment I heard of a fire being lighted in
Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, I leaped to the conclusion that it was to
destroy some important document—possibly a will. So the discovery of
the charred fragment in the grate was no surprise to me. I did not, of
course, know at the time that the will in question had only been made
this afternoon, and I will admit that, when I learnt that fact, I fell
into a grievous error. I came to the conclusion that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
determination to destroy her will arose as a direct consequence of the
quarrel she had that afternoon, and that therefore the quarrel took
place after, and not before the making of the will.
“Here, as we know, I was wrong, and I was forced to abandon that idea.
I faced the problem from a new standpoint. Now, at four o’clock, Dorcas
overheard her mistress saying angrily: ‘You need not think that any
fear of publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.”
I conjectured, and conjectured rightly, that these words were
addressed, not to her husband, but to Mr. John Cavendish. At five
o’clock, an hour later, she uses almost the same words, but the
standpoint is different. She admits to Dorcas, ‘I don’t know what to
do; scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing.’ At four
o’clock she has been angry, but completely mistress of herself. At five
o’clock she is in violent distress, and speaks of having had a great
shock.
“Looking at the matter psychologically, I drew one deduction which I
was convinced was correct. The second ‘scandal’ she spoke of was not
the same as the first—and it concerned herself!
“Let us reconstruct. At four o’clock, Mrs. Inglethorp quarrels with her
son, and threatens to denounce him to his wife—who, by the way,
overheard the greater part of the conversation. At four-thirty, Mrs.
Inglethorp, in consequence of a conversation on the validity of wills,
makes a will in favour of her husband, which the two gardeners witness.
At five o’clock, Dorcas finds her mistress in a state of considerable
agitation, with a slip of paper—‘a letter,’ Dorcas thinks—in her hand,
and it is then that she orders the fire in her room to be lighted.
Presumably, then, between four-thirty and five o’clock, something has
occurred to occasion a complete revolution of feeling, since she is now
as anxious to destroy the will, as she was before to make it. What was
that something?
“As far as we know, she was quite alone during that half-hour. Nobody
entered or left that boudoir. What then occasioned this sudden change
of sentiment?
“One can only guess, but I believe my guess to be correct. Mrs.
Inglethorp had no stamps in her desk. We know this, because later she
asked Dorcas to bring her some. Now in the opposite corner of the room
stood her husband’s desk—locked. She was anxious to find some stamps,
and, according to my theory, she tried her own keys in the desk. That
one of them fitted I know. She therefore opened the desk, and in
searching for the stamps she came across something else—that slip of
paper which Dorcas saw in her hand, and which assuredly was never meant
for Mrs. Inglethorp’s eyes. On the other hand, Mrs. Cavendish believed
that the slip of paper to which her mother-in-law clung so tenaciously
was a written proof of her own husband’s infidelity. She demanded it
from Mrs. Inglethorp who assured her, quite truly, that it had nothing
to do with that matter. Mrs. Cavendish did not believe her. She thought
that Mrs. Inglethorp was shielding her stepson. Now Mrs. Cavendish is a
very resolute woman, and, behind her mask of reserve, she was madly
jealous of her husband. She determined to get hold of that paper at all
costs, and in this resolution chance came to her aid. She happened to
pick up the key of Mrs. Inglethorp’s despatch-case, which had been lost
that morning. She knew that her mother-in-law invariably kept all
important papers in this particular case.
“Mrs. Cavendish, therefore, made her plans as only a woman driven
desperate through jealousy could have done. Some time in the evening
she unbolted the door leading into Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room.
Possibly she applied oil to the hinges, for I found that it opened
quite noiselessly when I tried it. She put off her project until the
early hours of the morning as being safer, since the servants were
accustomed to hearing her move about her room at that time. She dressed
completely in her land kit, and made her way quietly through
Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room into that of Mrs. Inglethorp.”
He paused a moment, and Cynthia interrupted:
“But I should have woken up if anyone had come through my room?”
“Not if you were drugged, mademoiselle.”
“Drugged?”
“Mais, oui!”
“You remember”—he addressed us collectively again—“that through all the
tumult and noise next door Mademoiselle Cynthia slept. That admitted of
two possibilities. Either her sleep was feigned—which I did not
believe—or her unconsciousness was indeed by artificial means.
“With this latter idea in my mind, I examined all the coffee-cups most
carefully, remembering that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had brought
Mademoiselle Cynthia her coffee the night before. I took a sample from
each cup, and had them analysed—with no result. I had counted the cups
carefully, in the event of one having been removed. Six persons had
taken coffee, and six cups were duly found. I had to confess myself
mistaken.
“Then I discovered that I had been guilty of a very grave oversight.
Coffee had been brought in for seven persons, not six, for Dr.
Bauerstein had been there that evening. This changed the face of the
whole affair, for there was now one cup missing. The servants noticed
nothing, since Annie, the housemaid, who took in the coffee, brought in
seven cups, not knowing that Mr. Inglethorp never drank it, whereas
Dorcas, who cleared them away the following morning, found six as
usual—or strictly speaking she found five, the sixth being the one
found broken in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room.
“I was confident that the missing cup was that of Mademoiselle Cynthia.
I had an additional reason for that belief in the fact that all the
cups found contained sugar, which Mademoiselle Cynthia never took in
her coffee. My attention was attracted by the story of Annie about some
‘salt’ on the tray of cocoa which she took every night to Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room. I accordingly secured a sample of that cocoa, and
sent it to be analysed.”
“But that had already been done by Dr. Bauerstein,” said Lawrence
quickly.
“Not exactly. The analyst was asked by him to report whether strychnine
was, or was not, present. He did not have it tested, as I did, for a
narcotic.”
“For a narcotic?”
“Yes. Here is the analyst’s report. Mrs. Cavendish administered a safe,
but effectual, narcotic to both Mrs. Inglethorp and Mademoiselle
Cynthia. And it is possible that she had a mauvais quart d’heure in
consequence! Imagine her feelings when her mother-in-law is suddenly
taken ill and dies, and immediately after she hears the word ‘Poison’!
She has believed that the sleeping draught she administered was
perfectly harmless, but there is no doubt that for one terrible moment
she must have feared that Mrs. Inglethorp’s death lay at her door. She
is seized with panic, and under its influence she hurries downstairs,
and quickly drops the coffee-cup and saucer used by Mademoiselle
Cynthia into a large brass vase, where it is discovered later by
Monsieur Lawrence. The remains of the cocoa she dare not touch. Too
many eyes are upon her. Guess at her relief when strychnine is
mentioned, and she discovers that after all the tragedy is not her
doing.
“We are now able to account for the symptoms of strychnine poisoning
being so long in making their appearance. A narcotic taken with
strychnine will delay the action of the poison for some hours.”
Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him, the colour slowly rising in her
face.
“All you have said is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. It was the most
awful hour of my life. I shall never forget it. But you are wonderful.
I understand now——”
“What I meant when I told you that you could safely confess to Papa
Poirot, eh? But you would not trust me.”
“I see everything now,” said Lawrence. “The drugged cocoa, taken on top
of the poisoned coffee, amply accounts for the delay.”
“Exactly. But was the coffee poisoned, or was it not? We come to a
little difficulty here, since Mrs. Inglethorp never drank it.”
“What?” The cry of surprise was universal.
“No. You will remember my speaking of a stain on the carpet in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room? There were some peculiar points about that stain. It
was still damp, it exhaled a strong odour of coffee, and imbedded in
the nap of the carpet I found some little splinters of china. What had
happened was plain to me, for not two minutes before I had placed my
little case on the table near the window, and the table, tilting up,
had deposited it upon the floor on precisely the identical spot. In
exactly the same way, Mrs. Inglethorp had laid down her cup of coffee
on reaching her room the night before, and the treacherous table had
played her the same trick.
“What happened next is mere guess work on my part, but I should say
that Mrs. Inglethorp picked up the broken cup and placed it on the
table by the bed. Feeling in need of a stimulant of some kind, she
heated up her cocoa, and drank it off then and there. Now we are faced
with a new problem. We know the cocoa contained no strychnine. The
coffee was never drunk. Yet the strychnine must have been administered
between seven and nine o’clock that evening. What third medium was
there—a medium so suitable for disguising the taste of strychnine that
it is extraordinary no one has thought of it?” Poirot looked round the
room, and then answered himself impressively. “Her medicine!”
“Do you mean that the murderer introduced the strychnine into her
tonic?” I cried.
“There was no need to introduce it. It was already there—in the
mixture. The strychnine that killed Mrs. Inglethorp was the identical
strychnine prescribed by Dr. Wilkins. To make that clear to you, I will
read you an extract from a book on dispensing which I found in the
Dispensary of the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster:
“‘The following prescription has become famous in text books:
     Strychninae Sulph. . . . . . 1 gr.
     Potass Bromide . . . . . . . 3vi
     Aqua ad. . . . . . . . . . . . . 3viii
     Fiat Mistura
This solution deposits in a few hours the greater part of the
strychnine salt as an insoluble bromide in transparent crystals. A lady
in England lost her life by taking a similar mixture: the precipitated
strychnine collected at the bottom, and in taking the last dose she
swallowed nearly all of it!
“Now there was, of course, no bromide in Dr. Wilkins’ prescription, but
you will remember that I mentioned an empty box of bromide powders. One
or two of those powders introduced into the full bottle of medicine
would effectually precipitate the strychnine, as the book describes,
and cause it to be taken in the last dose. You will learn later that
the person who usually poured out Mrs. Inglethorp’s medicine was always
extremely careful not to shake the bottle, but to leave the sediment at
the bottom of it undisturbed.
“Throughout the case, there have been evidences that the tragedy was
intended to take place on Monday evening. On that day, Mrs.
Inglethorp’s bell wire was neatly cut, and on Monday evening
Mademoiselle Cynthia was spending the night with friends, so that Mrs.
Inglethorp would have been quite alone in the right wing, completely
shut off from help of any kind, and would have died, in all
probability, before medical aid could have been summoned. But in her
hurry to be in time for the village entertainment Mrs. Inglethorp
forgot to take her medicine, and the next day she lunched away from
home, so that the last—and fatal—dose was actually taken twenty-four
hours later than had been anticipated by the murderer; and it is owing
to that delay that the final proof—the last link of the chain—is now in
my hands.”
Amid breathless excitement, he held out three thin strips of paper.
“A letter in the murderer’s own hand-writing, mes amis! Had it been a
little clearer in its terms, it is possible that Mrs. Inglethorp,
warned in time, would have escaped. As it was, she realized her danger,
but not the manner of it.”
In the deathly silence, Poirot pieced together the slips of paper and,
clearing his throat, read:
Dearest Evelyn:
  ‘You will be anxious at hearing nothing. It is all right—only it
  will be to-night instead of last night. You understand. There’s a
  good time coming once the old woman is dead and out of the way. No
  one can possibly bring home the crime to me. That idea of yours
  about the bromides was a stroke of genius! But we must be very
  circumspect. A false step——’
“Here, my friends, the letter breaks off. Doubtless the writer was
interrupted; but there can be no question as to his identity. We all
know this hand-writing and——”
A howl that was almost a scream broke the silence.
“You devil! How did you get it?”
A chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movement
on his part, and his assailant fell with a crash.
“Messieurs, mesdames,” said Poirot, with a flourish, “let me
introduce you to the murderer, Mr. Alfred Inglethorp!”
CHAPTER XIII. POIROT EXPLAINS
“Poirot, you old villain,” I said, “I’ve half a mind to strangle you!
What do you mean by deceiving me as you have done?”
We were sitting in the library. Several hectic days lay behind us. In
the room below, John and Mary were together once more, while Alfred
Inglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last, I had Poirot
to myself, and could relieve my still burning curiosity.
Poirot did not answer me for a moment, but at last he said:
“I did not deceive you, mon ami. At most, I permitted you to deceive
yourself.”
“Yes, but why?”
“Well, it is difficult to explain. You see, my friend, you have a
nature so honest, and a countenance so transparent, that—enfin, to
conceal your feelings is impossible! If I had told you my ideas, the
very first time you saw Mr. Alfred Inglethorp that astute gentleman
would have—in your so expressive idiom—‘smelt a rat’! And then,
bonjour to our chances of catching him!”
“I think that I have more diplomacy than you give me credit for.”
“My friend,” besought Poirot, “I implore you, do not enrage yourself!
Your help has been of the most invaluable. It is but the extremely
beautiful nature that you have, which made me pause.”
“Well,” I grumbled, a little mollified. “I still think you might have
given me a hint.”
“But I did, my friend. Several hints. You would not take them. Think
now, did I ever say to you that I believed John Cavendish guilty? Did I
not, on the contrary, tell you that he would almost certainly be
acquitted?”
“Yes, but——”
“And did I not immediately afterwards speak of the difficulty of
bringing the murderer to justice? Was it not plain to you that I was
speaking of two entirely different persons?”
“No,” I said, “it was not plain to me!”
“Then again,” continued Poirot, “at the beginning, did I not repeat to
you several times that I didn’t want Mr. Inglethorp arrested now?
That should have conveyed something to you.”
“Do you mean to say you suspected him as long ago as that?”
“Yes. To begin with, whoever else might benefit by Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death, her husband would benefit the most. There was no getting away
from that. When I went up to Styles with you that first day, I had no
idea as to how the crime had been committed, but from what I knew of
Mr. Inglethorp I fancied that it would be very hard to find anything to
connect him with it. When I arrived at the château, I realized at once
that it was Mrs. Inglethorp who had burnt the will; and there, by the
way, you cannot complain, my friend, for I tried my best to force on
you the significance of that bedroom fire in midsummer.”
“Yes, yes,” I said impatiently. “Go on.”
“Well, my friend, as I say, my views as to Mr. Inglethorp’s guilt were
very much shaken. There was, in fact, so much evidence against him that
I was inclined to believe that he had not done it.”
“When did you change your mind?”
“When I found that the more efforts I made to clear him, the more
efforts he made to get himself arrested. Then, when I discovered that
Inglethorp had nothing to do with Mrs. Raikes and that in fact it was
John Cavendish who was interested in that quarter, I was quite sure.”
“But why?”
“Simply this. If it had been Inglethorp who was carrying on an intrigue
with Mrs. Raikes, his silence was perfectly comprehensible. But, when I
discovered that it was known all over the village that it was John who
was attracted by the farmer’s pretty wife, his silence bore quite a
different interpretation. It was nonsense to pretend that he was afraid
of the scandal, as no possible scandal could attach to him. This
attitude of his gave me furiously to think, and I was slowly forced to
the conclusion that Alfred Inglethorp wanted to be arrested. Eh bien!
from that moment, I was equally determined that he should not be
arrested.”
“Wait a minute. I don’t see why he wished to be arrested?”
“Because, mon ami, it is the law of your country that a man once
acquitted can never be tried again for the same offence. Aha! but it
was clever—his idea! Assuredly, he is a man of method. See here, he
knew that in his position he was bound to be suspected, so he conceived
the exceedingly clever idea of preparing a lot of manufactured evidence
against himself. He wished to be arrested. He would then produce his
irreproachable alibi—and, hey presto, he was safe for life!”
“But I still don’t see how he managed to prove his alibi, and yet go to
the chemist’s shop?”
Poirot stared at me in surprise.
“Is it possible? My poor friend! You have not yet realized that it was
Miss Howard who went to the chemist’s shop?”
“Miss Howard?”
“But, certainly. Who else? It was most easy for her. She is of a good
height, her voice is deep and manly; moreover, remember, she and
Inglethorp are cousins, and there is a distinct resemblance between
them, especially in their gait and bearing. It was simplicity itself.
They are a clever pair!”
“I am still a little fogged as to how exactly the bromide business was
done,” I remarked.
“Bon! I will reconstruct for you as far as possible. I am inclined to
think that Miss Howard was the master mind in that affair. You remember
her once mentioning that her father was a doctor? Possibly she
dispensed his medicines for him, or she may have taken the idea from
one of the many books lying about when Mademoiselle Cynthia was
studying for her exam. Anyway, she was familiar with the fact that the
addition of a bromide to a mixture containing strychnine would cause
the precipitation of the latter. Probably the idea came to her quite
suddenly. Mrs. Inglethorp had a box of bromide powders, which she
occasionally took at night. What could be easier than quietly to
dissolve one or more of those powders in Mrs. Inglethorp’s large sized
bottle of medicine when it came from Coot’s? The risk is practically
nil. The tragedy will not take place until nearly a fortnight later. If
anyone has seen either of them touching the medicine, they will have
forgotten it by that time. Miss Howard will have engineered her
quarrel, and departed from the house. The lapse of time, and her
absence, will defeat all suspicion. Yes, it was a clever idea! If they
had left it alone, it is possible the crime might never have been
brought home to them. But they were not satisfied. They tried to be too
clever—and that was their undoing.”
Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.
“They arranged a plan to throw suspicion on John Cavendish, by buying
strychnine at the village chemist’s, and signing the register in his
hand-writing.
“On Monday Mrs. Inglethorp will take the last dose of her medicine. On
Monday, therefore, at six o’clock, Alfred Inglethorp arranges to be
seen by a number of people at a spot far removed from the village. Miss
Howard has previously made up a cock and bull story about him and Mrs.
Raikes to account for his holding his tongue afterwards. At six
o’clock, Miss Howard, disguised as Alfred Inglethorp, enters the
chemist’s shop, with her story about a dog, obtains the strychnine, and
writes the name of Alfred Inglethorp in John’s handwriting, which she
had previously studied carefully.
“But, as it will never do if John, too, can prove an alibi, she writes
him an anonymous note—still copying his hand-writing—which takes him to
a remote spot where it is exceedingly unlikely that anyone will see
him.
“So far, all goes well. Miss Howard goes back to Middlingham. Alfred
Inglethorp returns to Styles. There is nothing that can compromise him
in any way, since it is Miss Howard who has the strychnine, which,
after all, is only wanted as a blind to throw suspicion on John
Cavendish.
“But now a hitch occurs. Mrs. Inglethorp does not take her medicine
that night. The broken bell, Cynthia’s absence—arranged by Inglethorp
through his wife—all these are wasted. And then—he makes his slip.
“Mrs. Inglethorp is out, and he sits down to write to his accomplice,
who, he fears, may be in a panic at the non-success of their plan. It
is probable that Mrs. Inglethorp returned earlier than he expected.
Caught in the act, and somewhat flurried he hastily shuts and locks his
desk. He fears that if he remains in the room he may have to open it
again, and that Mrs. Inglethorp might catch sight of the letter before
he could snatch it up. So he goes out and walks in the woods, little
dreaming that Mrs. Inglethorp will open his desk, and discover the
incriminating document.
“But this, as we know, is what happened. Mrs. Inglethorp reads it, and
becomes aware of the perfidy of her husband and Evelyn Howard, though,
unfortunately, the sentence about the bromides conveys no warning to
her mind. She knows that she is in danger—but is ignorant of where the
danger lies. She decides to say nothing to her husband, but sits down
and writes to her solicitor, asking him to come on the morrow, and she
also determines to destroy immediately the will which she has just
made. She keeps the fatal letter.”
“It was to discover that letter, then, that her husband forced the lock
of the despatch-case?”
“Yes, and from the enormous risk he ran we can see how fully he
realized its importance. That letter excepted, there was absolutely
nothing to connect him with the crime.”
“There’s only one thing I can’t make out, why didn’t he destroy it at
once when he got hold of it?”
“Because he did not dare take the biggest risk of all—that of keeping
it on his own person.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Look at it from his point of view. I have discovered that there were
only five short minutes in which he could have taken it—the five
minutes immediately before our own arrival on the scene, for before
that time Annie was brushing the stairs, and would have seen anyone who
passed going to the right wing. Figure to yourself the scene! He enters
the room, unlocking the door by means of one of the other doorkeys—they
were all much alike. He hurries to the despatch-case—it is locked, and
the keys are nowhere to be seen. That is a terrible blow to him, for it
means that his presence in the room cannot be concealed as he had
hoped. But he sees clearly that everything must be risked for the sake
of that damning piece of evidence. Quickly, he forces the lock with a
penknife, and turns over the papers until he finds what he is looking
for.
“But now a fresh dilemma arises: he dare not keep that piece of paper
on him. He may be seen leaving the room—he may be searched. If the
paper is found on him, it is certain doom. Probably, at this minute,
too, he hears the sounds below of Mr. Wells and John leaving the
boudoir. He must act quickly. Where can he hide this terrible slip of
paper? The contents of the waste-paper-basket are kept and in any case,
are sure to be examined. There are no means of destroying it; and he
dare not keep it. He looks round, and he sees—what do you think, mon
ami?”
I shook my head.
“In a moment, he has torn the letter into long thin strips, and rolling
them up into spills he thrusts them hurriedly in amongst the other
spills in the vase on the mantle-piece.”
I uttered an exclamation.
“No one would think of looking there,” Poirot continued. “And he will
be able, at his leisure, to come back and destroy this solitary piece
of evidence against him.”
“Then, all the time, it was in the spill vase in Mrs. Inglethorp’s
bedroom, under our very noses?” I cried.
Poirot nodded.
“Yes, my friend. That is where I discovered my ‘last link,’ and I owe
that very fortunate discovery to you.”
“To me?”
“Yes. Do you remember telling me that my hand shook as I was
straightening the ornaments on the mantelpiece?”
“Yes, but I don’t see——”
“No, but I saw. Do you know, my friend, I remembered that earlier in
the morning, when we had been there together, I had straightened all
the objects on the mantelpiece. And, if they were already straightened,
there would be no need to straighten them again, unless, in the
meantime, someone else had touched them.”
“Dear me,” I murmured, “so that is the explanation of your
extraordinary behaviour. You rushed down to Styles, and found it still
there?”
“Yes, and it was a race for time.”
“But I still can’t understand why Inglethorp was such a fool as to
leave it there when he had plenty of opportunity to destroy it.”
“Ah, but he had no opportunity. I saw to that.”
“You?”
“Yes. Do you remember reproving me for taking the household into my
confidence on the subject?”
“Yes.”
“Well, my friend, I saw there was just one chance. I was not sure then
if Inglethorp was the criminal or not, but if he was I reasoned that he
would not have the paper on him, but would have hidden it somewhere,
and by enlisting the sympathy of the household I could effectually
prevent his destroying it. He was already under suspicion, and by
making the matter public I secured the services of about ten amateur
detectives, who would be watching him unceasingly, and being himself
aware of their watchfulness he would not dare seek further to destroy
the document. He was therefore forced to depart from the house, leaving
it in the spill vase.”
“But surely Miss Howard had ample opportunities of aiding him.”
“Yes, but Miss Howard did not know of the paper’s existence. In
accordance with their prearranged plan, she never spoke to Alfred
Inglethorp. They were supposed to be deadly enemies, and until John
Cavendish was safely convicted they neither of them dared risk a
meeting. Of course I had a watch kept on Mr. Inglethorp, hoping that
sooner or later he would lead me to the hiding-place. But he was too
clever to take any chances. The paper was safe where it was; since no
one had thought of looking there in the first week, it was not likely
they would do so afterwards. But for your lucky remark, we might never
have been able to bring him to justice.”
“I understand that now; but when did you first begin to suspect Miss
Howard?”
“When I discovered that she had told a lie at the inquest about the
letter she had received from Mrs. Inglethorp.”
“Why, what was there to lie about?”
“You saw that letter? Do you recall its general appearance?”
“Yes—more or less.”
“You will recollect, then, that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote a very
distinctive hand, and left large clear spaces between her words. But if
you look at the date at the top of the letter you will notice that
‘July 17th’ is quite different in this respect. Do you see what I
mean?”
“No,” I confessed, “I don’t.”
“You do not see that that letter was not written on the 17th, but on
the 7th—the day after Miss Howard’s departure? The ‘1’ was written in
before the ‘7’ to turn it into the ‘17th’.”
“But why?”
“That is exactly what I asked myself. Why does Miss Howard suppress the
letter written on the 17th, and produce this faked one instead? Because
she did not wish to show the letter of the 17th. Why, again? And at
once a suspicion dawned in my mind. You will remember my saying that it
was wise to beware of people who were not telling you the truth.”
“And yet,” I cried indignantly, “after that, you gave me two reasons
why Miss Howard could not have committed the crime!”
“And very good reasons too,” replied Poirot. “For a long time they were
a stumbling-block to me until I remembered a very significant fact:
that she and Alfred Inglethorp were cousins. She could not have
committed the crime single-handed, but the reasons against that did not
debar her from being an accomplice. And, then, there was that rather
over-vehement hatred of hers! It concealed a very opposite emotion.
There was, undoubtedly, a tie of passion between them long before he
came to Styles. They had already arranged their infamous plot—that he
should marry this rich, but rather foolish old lady, induce her to make
a will leaving her money to him, and then gain their ends by a very
cleverly conceived crime. If all had gone as they planned, they would
probably have left England, and lived together on their poor victim’s
money.
“They are a very astute and unscrupulous pair. While suspicion was to
be directed against him, she would be making quiet preparations for a
very different dénouement. She arrives from Middlingham with all the
compromising items in her possession. No suspicion attaches to her. No
notice is paid to her coming and going in the house. She hides the
strychnine and glasses in John’s room. She puts the beard in the attic.
She will see to it that sooner or later they are duly discovered.”
“I don’t quite see why they tried to fix the blame on John,” I
remarked. “It would have been much easier for them to bring the crime
home to Lawrence.”
“Yes, but that was mere chance. All the evidence against him arose out
of pure accident. It must, in fact, have been distinctly annoying to
the pair of schemers.”
“His manner was unfortunate,” I observed thoughtfully.
“Yes. You realize, of course, what was at the back of that?”
“No.”
“You did not understand that he believed Mademoiselle Cynthia guilty of
the crime?”
“No,” I exclaimed, astonished. “Impossible!”
“Not at all. I myself nearly had the same idea. It was in my mind when
I asked Mr. Wells that first question about the will. Then there were
the bromide powders which she had made up, and her clever male
impersonations, as Dorcas recounted them to us. There was really more
evidence against her than anyone else.”
“You are joking, Poirot!”
“No. Shall I tell you what made Monsieur Lawrence turn so pale when he
first entered his mother’s room on the fatal night? It was because,
whilst his mother lay there, obviously poisoned, he saw, over your
shoulder, that the door into Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room was unbolted.”
“But he declared that he saw it bolted!” I cried.
“Exactly,” said Poirot dryly. “And that was just what confirmed my
suspicion that it was not. He was shielding Mademoiselle Cynthia.”
“But why should he shield her?”
“Because he is in love with her.”
I laughed.
“There, Poirot, you are quite wrong! I happen to know for a fact that,
far from being in love with her, he positively dislikes her.”
“Who told you that, mon ami?”
“Cynthia herself.”
“La pauvre petite! And she was concerned?”
“She said that she did not mind at all.”
“Then she certainly did mind very much,” remarked Poirot. “They are
like that—les femmes!”
“What you say about Lawrence is a great surprise to me,” I said.
“But why? It was most obvious. Did not Monsieur Lawrence make the sour
face every time Mademoiselle Cynthia spoke and laughed with his
brother? He had taken it into his long head that Mademoiselle Cynthia
was in love with Monsieur John. When he entered his mother’s room, and
saw her obviously poisoned, he jumped to the conclusion that
Mademoiselle Cynthia knew something about the matter. He was nearly
driven desperate. First he crushed the coffee-cup to powder under his
feet, remembering that she had gone up with his mother the night
before, and he determined that there should be no chance of testing its
contents. Thenceforward, he strenuously, and quite uselessly, upheld
the theory of ‘Death from natural causes’.”
“And what about the ‘extra coffee-cup’?”
“I was fairly certain that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had hidden it, but
I had to make sure. Monsieur Lawrence did not know at all what I meant;
but, on reflection, he came to the conclusion that if he could find an
extra coffee-cup anywhere his lady love would be cleared of suspicion.
And he was perfectly right.”
“One thing more. What did Mrs. Inglethorp mean by her dying words?”
“They were, of course, an accusation against her husband.”
“Dear me, Poirot,” I said with a sigh, “I think you have explained
everything. I am glad it has all ended so happily. Even John and his
wife are reconciled.”
“Thanks to me.”
“How do you mean—thanks to you?”
“My dear friend, do you not realize that it was simply and solely the
trial which has brought them together again? That John Cavendish still
loved his wife, I was convinced. Also, that she was equally in love
with him. But they had drifted very far apart. It all arose from a
misunderstanding. She married him without love. He knew it. He is a
sensitive man in his way, he would not force himself upon her if she
did not want him. And, as he withdrew, her love awoke. But they are
both unusually proud, and their pride held them inexorably apart. He
drifted into an entanglement with Mrs. Raikes, and she deliberately
cultivated the friendship of Dr. Bauerstein. Do you remember the day of
John Cavendish’s arrest, when you found me deliberating over a big
decision?”
“Yes, I quite understood your distress.”
“Pardon me, mon ami, but you did not understand it in the least. I
was trying to decide whether or not I would clear John Cavendish at
once. I could have cleared him—though it might have meant a failure to
convict the real criminals. They were entirely in the dark as to my
real attitude up to the very last moment—which partly accounts for my
success.”
“Do you mean that you could have saved John Cavendish from being
brought to trial?”
“Yes, my friend. But I eventually decided in favour of ‘a woman’s
happiness’. Nothing but the great danger through which they have passed
could have brought these two proud souls together again.”
I looked at Poirot in silent amazement. The colossal cheek of the
little man! Who on earth but Poirot would have thought of a trial for
murder as a restorer of conjugal happiness!
“I perceive your thoughts, mon ami,” said Poirot, smiling at me. “No
one but Hercule Poirot would have attempted such a thing! And you are
wrong in condemning it. The happiness of one man and one woman is the
greatest thing in all the world.”
His words took me back to earlier events. I remembered Mary as she lay
white and exhausted on the sofa, listening, listening. There had come
the sound of the bell below. She had started up. Poirot had opened the
door, and meeting her agonized eyes had nodded gently. “Yes, madame,”
he said. “I have brought him back to you.” He had stood aside, and as I
went out I had seen the look in Mary’s eyes, as John Cavendish had
caught his wife in his arms.
“Perhaps you are right, Poirot,” I said gently. “Yes, it is the
greatest thing in the world.”
Suddenly, there was a tap at the door, and Cynthia peeped in.
“I—I only——”
“Come in,” I said, springing up.
She came in, but did not sit down.
“I—only wanted to tell you something——”
“Yes?”
Cynthia fidgeted with a little tassel for some moments, then, suddenly
exclaiming: “You dears!” kissed first me and then Poirot, and rushed
out of the room again.
“What on earth does this mean?” I asked, surprised.
It was very nice to be kissed by Cynthia, but the publicity of the
salute rather impaired the pleasure.
“It means that she has discovered Monsieur Lawrence does not dislike
her as much as she thought,” replied Poirot philosophically.
“But——”
“Here he is.”
Lawrence at that moment passed the door.
“Eh! Monsieur Lawrence,” called Poirot. “We must congratulate you, is
it not so?”
Lawrence blushed, and then smiled awkwardly. A man in love is a sorry
spectacle. Now Cynthia had looked charming.
I sighed.
“What is it, mon ami?”
“Nothing,” I said sadly. “They are two delightful women!”
“And neither of them is for you?” finished Poirot. “Never mind. Console
yourself, my friend. We may hunt together again, who knows? And then——”
IT was 2 p.m. on the afternoon of May 7, 1915. The Lusitania had been
struck by two torpedoes in succession and was sinking rapidly, while
the boats were being launched with all possible speed. The women and
children were being lined up awaiting their turn. Some still clung
desperately to husbands and fathers; others clutched their children
closely to their breasts. One girl stood alone, slightly apart from
the rest. She was quite young, not more than eighteen. She did not seem
afraid, and her grave, steadfast eyes looked straight ahead.
“I beg your pardon.”
A man’s voice beside her made her start and turn. She had noticed the
speaker more than once amongst the first-class passengers. There had
been a hint of mystery about him which had appealed to her imagination.
He spoke to no one. If anyone spoke to him he was quick to rebuff the
overture. Also he had a nervous way of looking over his shoulder with a
swift, suspicious glance.
She noticed now that he was greatly agitated. There were beads of
perspiration on his brow. He was evidently in a state of overmastering
fear. And yet he did not strike her as the kind of man who would be
afraid to meet death!
“Yes?” Her grave eyes met his inquiringly.
He stood looking at her with a kind of desperate irresolution.
“It must be!” he muttered to himself. “Yes it is the only way.” Then
aloud he said abruptly: “You are an American?”
“Yes.”
“A patriotic one?”
The girl flushed.
“I guess you’ve no right to ask such a thing! Of course I am!”
“Don’t be offended. You wouldn’t be if you knew how much there was at
stake. But I’ve got to trust some one and it must be a woman.”
“Why?”
“Because of ‘women and children first.’” He looked round and lowered his
voice. “I’m carrying papers vitally important papers. They may make all
the difference to the Allies in the war. You understand? These papers
have got to be saved! They’ve more chance with you than with me. Will
you take them?”
The girl held out her hand.
“Wait I must warn you. There may be a risk if I’ve been followed. I
don’t think I have, but one never knows. If so, there will be danger.
Have you the nerve to go through with it?”
The girl smiled.
“I’ll go through with it all right. And I’m real proud to be chosen!
What am I to do with them afterwards?”
“Watch the newspapers! I’ll advertise in the personal column of the
Times, beginning ‘Shipmate.’ At the end of three days if there’s
nothing well, you’ll know I’m down and out. Then take the packet to
the American Embassy, and deliver it into the Ambassador’s own hands. Is
that clear?”
“Quite clear.”
“Then be ready I’m going to say good-bye.” He took her hand in his.
“Good-bye. Good luck to you,” he said in a louder tone.
Her hand closed on the oilskin packet that had lain in his palm.
The Lusitania settled with a more decided list to starboard. In answer
to a quick command, the girl went forward to take her place in the boat.
CHAPTER I. THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS, LTD.
“TOMMY, old thing!”
“Tuppence, old bean!”
The two young people greeted each other affectionately, and momentarily
blocked the Dover Street Tube exit in doing so. The adjective “old”
 was misleading. Their united ages would certainly not have totalled
forty-five.
“Not seen you for simply centuries,” continued the young man. “Where are
you off to? Come and chew a bun with me. We’re getting a bit unpopular
here blocking the gangway as it were. Let’s get out of it.”
The girl assenting, they started walking down Dover Street towards
Piccadilly.
“Now then,” said Tommy, “where shall we go?”
The very faint anxiety which underlay his tone did not escape the astute
ears of Miss Prudence Cowley, known to her intimate friends for some
mysterious reason as “Tuppence.” She pounced at once.
“Tommy, you’re stony!”
“Not a bit of it,” declared Tommy unconvincingly. “Rolling in cash.”
“You always were a shocking liar,” said Tuppence severely, “though you
did once persuade Sister Greenbank that the doctor had ordered you beer
as a tonic, but forgotten to write it on the chart. Do you remember?”
Tommy chuckled.
“I should think I did! Wasn’t the old cat in a rage when she found
out? Not that she was a bad sort really, old Mother Greenbank! Good old
hospital demobbed like everything else, I suppose?”
Tuppence sighed.
“Yes. You too?”
Tommy nodded.
“Two months ago.”
“Gratuity?” hinted Tuppence.
“Spent.”
“Oh, Tommy!”
“No, old thing, not in riotous dissipation. No such luck! The cost of
living ordinary plain, or garden living nowadays is, I assure you, if
you do not know ”
“My dear child,” interrupted Tuppence, “there is nothing I do not know
about the cost of living. Here we are at Lyons’, and we will each of us
pay for our own. That’s it!” And Tuppence led the way upstairs.
The place was full, and they wandered about looking for a table,
catching odds and ends of conversation as they did so.
“And do you know, she sat down and cried when I told her she couldn’t
have the flat after all.” “It was simply a bargain, my dear! Just like
the one Mabel Lewis brought from Paris ”
“Funny scraps one does overhear,” murmured Tommy. “I passed two Johnnies
in the street to-day talking about some one called Jane Finn. Did you
ever hear such a name?”
But at that moment two elderly ladies rose and collected parcels, and
Tuppence deftly ensconced herself in one of the vacant seats.
Tommy ordered tea and buns. Tuppence ordered tea and buttered toast.
“And mind the tea comes in separate teapots,” she added severely.
Tommy sat down opposite her. His bared head revealed a shock
of exquisitely slicked-back red hair. His face was pleasantly
ugly nondescript, yet unmistakably the face of a gentleman and a
sportsman. His brown suit was well cut, but perilously near the end of
its tether.
They were an essentially modern-looking couple as they sat there.
Tuppence had no claim to beauty, but there was character and charm in
the elfin lines of her little face, with its determined chin and large,
wide-apart grey eyes that looked mistily out from under straight, black
brows. She wore a small bright green toque over her black bobbed hair,
and her extremely short and rather shabby skirt revealed a pair of
uncommonly dainty ankles. Her appearance presented a valiant attempt at
smartness.
The tea came at last, and Tuppence, rousing herself from a fit of
meditation, poured it out.
“Now then,” said Tommy, taking a large bite of bun, “let’s get
up-to-date. Remember, I haven’t seen you since that time in hospital in
1916.”
“Very well.” Tuppence helped herself liberally to buttered toast.
“Abridged biography of Miss Prudence Cowley, fifth daughter of
Archdeacon Cowley of Little Missendell, Suffolk. Miss Cowley left the
delights (and drudgeries) of her home life early in the war and came up
to London, where she entered an officers’ hospital. First month: Washed
up six hundred and forty-eight plates every day. Second month: Promoted
to drying aforesaid plates. Third month: Promoted to peeling potatoes.
Fourth month: Promoted to cutting bread and butter. Fifth month:
Promoted one floor up to duties of wardmaid with mop and pail. Sixth
month: Promoted to waiting at table. Seventh month: Pleasing appearance
and nice manners so striking that am promoted to waiting on the Sisters!
Eighth month: Slight check in career. Sister Bond ate Sister Westhaven’s
egg! Grand row! Wardmaid clearly to blame! Inattention in such important
matters cannot be too highly censured. Mop and pail again! How are the
mighty fallen! Ninth month: Promoted to sweeping out wards, where I
found a friend of my childhood in Lieutenant Thomas Beresford (bow,
Tommy!), whom I had not seen for five long years. The meeting was
affecting! Tenth month: Reproved by matron for visiting the pictures in
company with one of the patients, namely: the aforementioned Lieutenant
Thomas Beresford. Eleventh and twelfth months: Parlourmaid duties
resumed with entire success. At the end of the year left hospital in a
blaze of glory. After that, the talented Miss Cowley drove successively
a trade delivery van, a motor-lorry and a general! The last was the
pleasantest. He was quite a young general!”
“What blighter was that?” inquired Tommy. “Perfectly sickening the way
those brass hats drove from the War Office to the Savoy, and from the
Savoy to the War Office!”
