
Three boys entered, and Harry recognized the middle
one at once: It was the pale boy from Madam Malkin’s
robe shop. He was looking at Harry with a lot more
interest than he’d shown back in Diagon Alley.
“Is it true?” he said. “They’re saying all down the train
that Harry Potter’s in this compartment. So it’s you, is
it?”
“Yes,” said Harry. He was looking at the other boys.
Both of them were thickset and looked extremely
mean. Standing on either side of the pale boy, they
looked like bodyguards.
“Oh, this is Crabbe and this is Goyle,” said the pale
boy carelessly, noticing where Harry was looking.
“And my names Malfoy, Draco Malfoy.”
Ron gave a slight cough, which might have been
hiding a snigger. Draco Malfoy looked at him.
“Think my name’s funny, do you? No need to ask who
you are. My father told me all the Weasleys have red
hair, freckles, and more children than they can
afford.”
He turned back to Harry. “You’ll soon find out some
wizarding families are much better than others,
Potter. You don’t want to go making friends with the
wrong sort. I can help you there.”

He held out his hand to shake Harry’s, but Harry
didn’t take it.
“I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself,
thanks,” he said coolly.
Draco Malfoy didn’t go red, but a pink tinge appeared
in his pale cheeks.
“I’d be careful if I were you, Potter,” he said slowly.
“Unless you’re a bit politer you’ll go the same way as
your parents. They didn’t know what was good for
them, either. You hang around with riffraff like the
Weasleys and that Hagrid, and it’ll rub off on you.”
Both Harry and Ron stood up.
“Say that again,” Ron said, his face as red as his hair.
“Oh, you’re going to fight us, are you?” Malfoy
sneered.
“Unless you get out now,” said Harry, more bravely
than he felt, because Crabbe and Goyle were a lot
bigger than him or Ron.
“But we don’t feel like leaving, do we, boys? We’ve
eaten all our food and you still seem to have some.”
Goyle reached toward the Chocolate Frogs next to
Ron — Ron leapt forward, but before he’d so much as
touched Goyle, Goyle let out a horrible yell.
Scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger, sharp
little teeth sunk deep into Goyle ’s knuckle — Crabbe
and Malfoy backed away as Goyle swung Scabbers
round and round, howling, and when Scabbers finally
flew off and hit the window, all three of them
disappeared at once. Perhaps they thought there were

more rats lurking among the sweets, or perhaps
they’d heard footsteps, because a second later,
Hermione Granger had come in.
“What has been going on?” she said, looking at the
sweets all over the floor and Ron picking up Scabbers
by his tail.
“I think he’s been knocked out,” Ron said to Harry.
He looked closer at Scabbers. “No — I don’t believe it
— he’s gone back to sleep.”
And so he had.
“You’ve met Malfoy before?”
Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley.
“I’ve heard of his family,” said Ron darkly. “They were
some of the first to come back to our side after You-
Know-Who disappeared. Said they’d been bewitched.
My dad doesn’t believe it. He says Malfoy’s father
didn’t need an excuse to go over to the Dark Side.” He
turned to Hermione. “Can we help you with
something?”
“You’d better hurry up and put your robes on, I’ve
just been up to the front to ask the conductor, and he
says we’re nearly there. You haven’t been fighting,
have you? You’ll be in trouble before we even get
there!”
“Scabbers has been fighting, not us,” said Ron,
scowling at her. “Would you mind leaving while we
change?”
“All right — I only came in here because people
outside are behaving very childishly, racing up and
down the corridors,” said Hermione in a sniffy voice.

“And you’ve got dirt on your nose, by the way, did you
know?”
Ron glared at her as she left. Harry peered out of the
window. It was getting dark. He could see mountains
and forests under a deep purple sky. The train did
seem to be slowing down.
He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on their
long black robes. Ron’s were a bit short for him, you
could see his sneakers underneath them.
A voice echoed through the train: “We will be reaching
Hogwarts in five minutes’ time. Please leave your
luggage on the train, it will be taken to the school
separately.”
Harry’s stomach lurched with nerves and Ron, he
saw, looked pale under his freckles. They crammed
their pockets with the last of the sweets and joined
the crowd thronging the corridor.
The train slowed right down and finally stopped.
People pushed their way toward the door and out on
to a tiny, dark platform. Harry shivered in the cold
night air. Then a lamp came bobbing over the heads
of the students, and Harry heard a familiar voice:
“Firs’ years! Firs’ years over here! All right there,
Harry?”
Hagrid’s big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads.
“C’mon, follow me — any more firs’ years? Mind yer
step, now! Firs’ years follow me!”
Slipping and stumbling, they followed Hagrid down
what seemed to be a steep, narrow path. It was so
dark on either side of them that Harry thought there
must be thick trees there. Nobody spoke much.

Neville, the boy who kept losing his toad, sniffed once
or twice.
“Yeh’ll get yer firs’ sight o’ Hogwarts in a sec,” Hagrid
called over his shoulder, “jus’ round this bend here.”
There was a loud “Oooooh!”
The narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edge
of a great black lake. Perched atop a high mountain
on the other side, its windows sparkling in the starry
sky, was a vast castle with many turrets and towers.
“No more’n four to a boat!” Hagrid called, pointing to
a fleet of little boats sitting in the water by the shore.
Harry and Ron were followed into their boat by Neville
and Hermione.
“Everyone in?” shouted Hagrid, who had a boat to
himself. “Right then — FORWARD!”
And the fleet of little boats moved off all at once,
gliding across the lake, which was as smooth as
glass. Everyone was silent, staring up at the great
castle overhead. It towered over them as they sailed
nearer and nearer to the cliff on which it stood.
“Heads down!” yelled Hagrid as the first boats reached
the cliff; they all bent their heads and the little boats
carried them through a curtain of ivy that hid a wide
opening in the cliff face. They were carried along a
dark tunnel, which seemed to be taking them right
underneath the castle, until they reached a kind of
underground harbor, where they clambered out onto
rocks and pebbles.
“Oy, you there! Is this your toad?” said Hagrid, who
was checking the boats as people climbed out of
them.

“Trevor!” cried Neville blissfully, holding out his
hands. Then they clambered up a passageway in the
rock after Hagrid’s lamp, coming out at last onto
smooth, damp grass right in the shadow of the castle.
They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded
around the huge, oak front door.
“Everyone here? You there, still got yer toad?”
Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times
on the castle door.

7
THE SORTING HAT
The door swung open at once. A tall, black-haired
witch in emerald-green robes stood there. She had a
very stern face and Harry’s first thought was that this
was not someone to cross.
“The firs’ years, Professor McGonagall,” said Hagrid.
“Thank you, Hagrid. I will take them from here.”
She pulled the door wide. The entrance hall was so
big you could have fit the whole of the Dursleys’
house in it. The stone walls were lit with flaming
torches like the ones at Gringotts, the ceiling was too
high to make out, and a magnificent marble staircase
facing them led to the upper floors.
They followed Professor McGonagall across the
flagged stone floor. Harry could hear the drone of
hundreds of voices from a doorway to the right — the
rest of the school must already be here — but
Professor McGonagall showed the first years into a
small, empty chamber off the hall. They crowded in,

standing rather closer together than they would
usually have done, peering about nervously.
“Welcome to Hogwarts,” said Professor McGonagall.
“The start-of-term banquet will begin shortly, but
before you take your seats in the Great Hall, you will
be sorted into your Houses. The Sorting is a very
important ceremony because, while you are here,
your House will be something like your family within
Hogwarts. You will have classes with the rest of your
House, sleep in your House dormitory, and spend free
time in your House common room.
“The four Houses are called Gryffindor, Hufflepuff,
Ravenclaw, and Slytherin. Each House has its own
noble history and each has produced outstanding
witches and wizards. While you are at Hogwarts, your
triumphs will earn your House points, while any rule-
breaking will lose House points. At the end of the
year, the House with the most points is awarded the
House cup, a great honor. I hope each of you will be a
credit to whichever House becomes yours.
“The Sorting Ceremony will take place in a few
minutes in front of the rest of the school. I suggest
you all smarten yourselves up as much as you can
while you are waiting.”
Her eyes lingered for a moment on Neville’s cloak,
which was fastened under his left ear, and on Ron’s
smudged nose. Harry nervously tried to flatten his
hair.
“I shall return when we are ready for you,” said
Professor McGonagall. “Please wait quietly.”
She left the chamber. Harry swallowed.

“How exactly do they sort us into Houses?” he asked
Ron.
“Some sort of test, I think. Fred said it hurts a lot, but
I think he was joking.”
Harry’s heart gave a horrible jolt. A test? In front of
the whole school? But he didn’t know any magic yet
— what on earth would he have to do? He hadn’t
expected something like this the moment they
arrived. He looked around anxiously and saw that
everyone else looked terrified, too. No one was talking
much except Hermione Granger, who was whispering
very fast about all the spells she’d learned and
wondering which one she’d need. Harry tried hard not
to listen to her. He’d never been more nervous, never,
not even when he’d had to take a school report home
to the Dursleys saying that he’d somehow turned his
teachers wig blue. He kept his eyes fixed on the door.
Any second now, Professor McGonagall would come
back and lead him to his doom.
Then something happened that made him jump about
a foot in the air — several people behind him
screamed.
“What the — ?”
He gasped. So did the people around him. About
twenty ghosts had just streamed through the back
wall. Pearly-white and slightly transparent, they
glided across the room talking to one another and
hardly glancing at the first years. They seemed to be
arguing. What looked like a fat little monk was
saying: “Forgive and forget, I say, we ought to give
him a second chance — ”
“My dear Friar, haven’t we given Peeves all the
chances he deserves? He gives us all a bad name and

you know, he’s not really even a ghost — I say, what
are you all doing here?”
A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly
noticed the first years.
Nobody answered.
“New students!” said the Fat Friar, smiling around at
them. “About to be Sorted, I suppose?”
A few people nodded mutely.
“Hope to see you in Hufflepuff!” said the Friar. “My old
House, you know.”
“Move along now,” said a sharp voice. “The Sorting
Ceremony’s about to start.”
Professor McGonagall had returned. One by one, the
ghosts floated away through the opposite wall.
“Now, form a line,” Professor McGonagall told the first
years, “and follow me.”
Feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead,
Harry got into line behind a boy with sandy hair, with
Ron behind him, and they walked out of the chamber,
back across the hall, and through a pair of double
doors into the Great Hall.
Harry had never even imagined such a strange and
splendid place. It was lit by thousands and thousands
of candles that were floating in midair over four long
tables, where the rest of the students were sitting.
These tables were laid with glittering golden plates
and goblets. At the top of the hall was another long
table where the teachers were sitting. Professor
McGonagall led the first years up here, so that they

came to a halt in a line facing the other students,
with the teachers behind them. The hundreds of faces
staring at them looked like pale lanterns in the
flickering candlelight. Dotted here and there among
the students, the ghosts shone misty silver. Mainly to
avoid all the staring eyes, Harry looked upward and
saw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars. He heard
Hermione whisper, “It’s bewitched to look like the sky
outside. I read about it in Hogwarts, A History.”
It was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all,
and that the Great Hall didn’t simply open on to the
heavens.
Harry quickly looked down again as Professor
McGonagall silently placed a four-legged stool in front
of the first years. On top of the stool she put a pointed
wizard’s hat. This hat was patched and frayed and
extremely dirty. Aunt Petunia wouldn’t have let it in
the house.
Maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it, Harry
thought wildly, that seemed the sort of thing —
noticing that everyone in the hall was now staring at
the hat, he stared at it, too. For a few seconds, there
was complete silence. Then the hat twitched. A rip
near the brim opened wide like a mouth — and the
hat began to sing:
“Oh, you may not think I’m pretty,
But don’t judge on what you see,
I’ll eat myself if you can find
A smarter hat than me.
You can keep your bowlers black,

Your top hats sleek and tall,
For I’m the Hogwarts Sorting Hat
And I can cap them all.
There’s nothing hidden in your head
The Sorting Hat can’t see,
So try me on and I will tell you
Where you ought to be.
You might belong in Gryffindor,
Where dwell the brave at heart,
Their daring, nerve, and chivalry
Set Gryffindors apart;
You might belong in Hufflepuff,
Where they are just and loyal,
Those patient Hufflepuffs are true
And unafraid of toil;
Or yet in wise old Ravenclaw,
If you’ve a ready mind,
Where those of wit and learning,
Will always find their kind;
Or perhaps in Slytherin

You’ll make your real friends,
Those cunning folk use any means
To achieve their ends.
So put me on! Don’t be afraid l\
And don’t get in a flap\
You’re in safe hands (though I have none)
For I’m a Thinking Cap\”
The whole hall burst into applause as the hat finished
its song. It bowed to each of the four tables and then
became quite still again.
“So we’ve just got to try on the hat!” Ron whispered to
Harry. “I’ll kill Fred, he was going on about wrestling
a troll.”
Harry smiled weakly. Yes, trying on the hat was a lot
better than having to do a spell, but he did wish they
could have tried it on without everyone watching. The
hat seemed to be asking rather a lot; Harry didn’t feel
brave or quick-witted or any of it at the moment. If
only the hat had mentioned a House for people who
felt a bit queasy, that would have been the one for
him.
Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding a
long roll of parchment.
“When I call your name, you will put on the hat and
sit on the stool to be sorted,” she said. “Abbott,
Hannah!”

A pink-faced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out of
line, put on the hat, which fell right down over her
eyes, and sat down. A moment’s pause —
“HUFFLEPUFF!” shouted the hat.
The table on the right cheered and clapped as
Hannah went to sit down at the Hufflepuff table.
Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar waving merrily at
her.
“Bones, Susan!”
“HUFFLEPUFF!” shouted the hat again, and Susan
scuttled off to sit next to Hannah.
“Boot, Terry!”
“RAVENCLAW!”
The table second from the left clapped this time;
several Ravenclaws stood up to shake hands with
Terry as he joined them.
“Brocklehurst, Mandy” went to Ravenclaw too, but
“Brown, Lavender” became the first new Gryffindor,
and the table on the far left exploded with cheers;
Harry could see Ron’s twin brothers catcalling.
“Bulstrode, Millicent” then became a Slytherin.
Perhaps it was Harry’s imagination, after all he’d
heard about Slytherin, but he thought they looked
like an unpleasant lot.
He was starting to feel definitely sick now. He
remembered being picked for teams during gym at his
old school. He had always been last to be chosen, not
because he was no good, but because no one wanted
Dudley to think they liked him.

“Finch-Fletchley, Justin!”
“HUFFLEPUFF!”
Sometimes, Harry noticed, the hat shouted out the
House at once, but at others it took a little while to
decide. “Finnigan, Seamus,” the sandy-haired boy
next to Harry in the line, sat on the stool for almost a
whole minute before the hat declared him a
Gryffindor.
“Granger, Hermione!”
Hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat
eagerly on her head.
“GRYFFINDOR!” shouted the hat. Ron groaned.
A horrible thought struck Harry, as horrible thoughts
always do when you’re very nervous. What if he
wasn’t chosen at all? What if he just sat there with
the hat over his eyes for ages, until Professor
McGonagall jerked it off his head and said there had
obviously been a mistake and he’d better get back on
the train?
When Neville Longbottom, the boy who kept losing his
toad, was called, he fell over on his way to the stool.
The hat took a long time to decide with Neville. When
it finally shouted, “GRYFFINDOR,” Neville ran off still
wearing it, and had to jog back amid gales of laughter
to give it to “MacDougal, Morag.”
Malfoy swaggered forward when his name was called
and got his wish at once: the hat had barely touched
his head when it screamed, “SLYTHERIN!”
Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle,
looking pleased with himself.

There weren’t many people left now.
“Moon” , “Nott” ... , “Parkinson” ... , then a pair of
twin girls, “Path” and “Path” ... , then “Perks, Sally-
Anne” . . . , and then, at last —
“Potter, Harry!”
As Harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly broke
out like little hissing fires all over the hall.
“ Potter , did she say?”
“ The Harry Potter?”
The last thing Harry saw before the hat dropped over
his eyes was the hall full of people craning to get a
good look at him. Next second he was looking at the
black inside of the hat. He waited.
“Hmm,” said a small voice in his ear. “Difficult. Very
difficult. Plenty of courage, I see. Not a bad mind
either. There’s talent, oh my goodness, yes — and a
nice thirst to prove yourself, now that’s interesting. ...
So where shall I put you?”
Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, Not
Slytherin, not Slytherin.
“Not Slytherin, eh?” said the small voice. “Are you
sure? You could be great, you know, it’s all here in
your head, and Slytherin will help you on the way to
greatness, no doubt about that — no? Well, if you’re
sure — better be GRYFFINDOR!”
Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole
hall. He took off the hat and walked shakily toward
the Gryffindor table. He was so relieved to have been
chosen and not put in Slytherin, he hardly noticed

that he was getting the loudest cheer yet. Percy the
Prefect got up and shook his hand vigorously, while
the Weasley twins yelled, “We got Potter! We got
Potter!” Harry sat down opposite the ghost in the ruff
he’d seen earlier. The ghost patted his arm, giving
Harry the sudden, horrible feeling he’d just plunged it
into a bucket of ice-cold water.
He could see the High Table properly now. At the end
nearest him sat Hagrid, who caught his eye and gave
him the thumbs up. Harry grinned back. And there,
in the center of the High Table, in a large gold chair,
sat Albus Dumbledore. Harry recognized him at once
from the card he’d gotten out of the Chocolate Frog on
the train. Dumbledore’s silver hair was the only thing
in the whole hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts.
Harry spotted Professor Quirrell, too, the nervous
young man from the Leaky Cauldron. He was looking
very peculiar in a large purple turban.
And now there were only four people left to be sorted.
“Thomas, Dean,” a Black boy even taller than Ron,
joined Harry at the Gryffindor table. “Turpin, Lisa,”
became a Ravenclaw and then it was Ron’s turn. He
was pale green by now. Harry crossed his fingers
under the table and a second later the hat had
shouted, “GRYFFINDOR!”
Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsed
into the chair next to him.
“Well done, Ron, excellent,” said Percy Weasley
pompously across Harry as “Zabini, Blaise,” was
made a Slytherin. Professor McGonagall rolled up her
scroll and took the Sorting Hat away.
Harry looked down at his empty gold plate. He had
only just realized how hungry he was. The pumpkin
pasties seemed ages ago.

Albus Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He was
beaming at the students, his arms opened wide, as if
nothing could have pleased him more than to see
them all there.
“Welcome!” he said. “Welcome to a new year at
Hogwarts! Before we begin our banquet, I would like
to say a few words. And here they are: Nitwit!
Blubber! Oddment! Tweak!
“Thank you!”
He sat back down. Everybody clapped and cheered.
Harry didn’t know whether to laugh or not.
“Is he — a bit mad?” he asked Percy uncertainly.
“Mad?” said Percy airily. “He’s a genius! Best wizard
in the world! But he is a bit mad, yes. Potatoes,
Harry?”
Harry’s mouth fell open. The dishes in front of him
were now piled with food. He had never seen so many
things he liked to eat on one table: roast beef, roast
chicken, pork chops and lamb chops, sausages,
bacon and steak, boiled potatoes, roast potatoes,
fries, Yorkshire pudding, peas, carrots, gravy,
ketchup, and, for some strange reason, peppermint
humbugs.
The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry, but
he’d never been allowed to eat as much as he liked.
Dudley had always taken anything that Harry really
wanted, even if it made him sick. Harry piled his plate
with a bit of everything except the peppermints and
began to eat. It was all delicious.
“That does look good,” said the ghost in the ruff sadly,
watching Harry cut up his steak.

“Can’t you — ?”
“I haven’t eaten for nearly five hundred years,” said
the ghost. “I don’t need to, of course, but one does
miss it. I don’t think I’ve introduced myself? Sir
Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington at your service.
Resident ghost of Gryffindor Tower.”
“I know who you are!” said Ron suddenly. “My
brothers told me about you — you’re Nearly Headless
Nick!”
“I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy
— ” the ghost began stiffly, but sandy-haired Seamus
Finnigan interrupted.
“Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?”
Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little
chat wasn’t going at all the way he wanted.
“Like this,” he said irritably. He seized his left ear and
pulled. His whole head swung off his neck and fell
onto his shoulder as if it was on a hinge. Someone
had obviously tried to behead him, but not done it
properly. Looking pleased at the stunned looks on
their faces, Nearly Headless Nick flipped his head
back onto his neck, coughed, and said, “So — new
Gryffindors! I hope you’re going to help us win the
House Championship this year? Gryffindors have
never gone so long without winning. Slytherins have
got the cup six years in a row! The Bloody Baron’s
becoming almost unbearable — he’s the Slytherin
ghost.”
Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw a
horrible ghost sitting there, with blank staring eyes, a
gaunt face, and robes stained with silver blood. He
was right next to Malfoy who, Harry was pleased to

see, didn’t look too pleased with the seating
arrangements.
“How did he get covered in blood?” asked Seamus
with great interest.
“I’ve never asked,” said Nearly Headless Nick
delicately.
When everyone had eaten as much as they could, the
remains of the food faded from the plates, leaving
them sparkling clean as before. A moment later the
desserts appeared. Blocks of ice cream in every flavor
you could think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate
eclairs and jam doughnuts, trifle, strawberries, Jell-
0, rice pudding ...
As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk
turned to their families.
“I’m half-and-half,” said Seamus. “Me dad’s a Muggle.
Mom didn’t tell him she was a witch ’til after they
were married. Bit of a nasty shock for him.”
The others laughed.
“What about you, Neville?” said Ron.
“Well, my gran brought me up and she’s a witch,”
said Neville, “but the family thought I was all- Muggle
for ages. My Great Uncle Algie kept trying to catch me
off my guard and force some magic out of me — he
pushed me off the end of Blackpool pier once, I nearly
drowned — but nothing happened until I was eight.
Great Uncle Algie came round for dinner, and he was
hanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankles
when my Great Auntie Enid offered him a meringue
and he accidentally let go. But I bounced — all the
way down the garden and into the road. They were all

really pleased, Gran was crying, she was so happy.
And you should have seen their faces when I got in
here — they thought I might not be magic enough to
come, you see. Great Uncle Algie was so pleased he
bought me my toad.”
On Harry’s other side, Percy Weasley and Hermione
were talking about lessons (“I do hope they start right
away, there’s so much to learn, I’m particularly
interested in Transfiguration, you know, turning
something into something else, of course, it’s
supposed to be very difficult — “You’ll be starting
small, just matches into needles and that sort of
thing — ”).
Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy,
looked up at the High Table again. Hagrid was
drinking deeply from his goblet. Professor McGonagall
was talking to Professor Dumbledore. Professor
Quirrell, in his absurd turban, was talking to a
teacher with greasy black hair, a hooked nose, and
sallow skin.
It happened very suddenly. The hook-nosed teacher
looked past Quirrell’s turban straight into Harry’s
eyes — and a sharp, hot pain shot across the scar on
Harry’s forehead.
“Ouch!” Harry clapped a hand to his head.
“What is it?” asked Percy.
“N-nothing.”
The pain had gone as quickly as it had come. Harder
to shake off was the feeling Harry had gotten from the
teacher’s look — a feeling that he didn’t like Harry at
all.

“Who’s that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?” he
asked Percy.
“Oh, you know Quirrell already, do you? No wonder
he’s looking so nervous, that’s Professor Snape. He
teaches Potions, but he doesn’t want to — everyone
knows he’s after Quirrell’s job. Knows an awful lot
about the Dark Arts, Snape.”
Harry watched Snape for a while, but Snape didn’t
look at him again.
At last, the desserts too disappeared, and Professor
Dumbledore got to his feet again. The hall fell silent.
“Ahem — just a few more words now that we are all
fed and watered. I have a few start-of-term notices to
give you.
“First years should note that the forest on the
grounds is forbidden to all pupils. And a few of our
older students would do well to remember that as
well.”
Dumbledore ’s twinkling eyes flashed in the direction
of the Weasley twins.
“I have also been asked by Mr. Filch, the caretaker, to
remind you all that no magic should be used between
classes in the corridors.
“Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of
the term. Anyone interested in playing for their House
teams should contact Madam Hooch.
“And finally, I must tell you that this year, the third-
floor corridor on the right-hand side is out of bounds
to everyone who does not wish to die a very painful
death.”

Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.
“He’s not serious?” he muttered to Percy.
“Must be,” said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore. “It’s
odd, because he usually gives us a reason why we’re
not allowed to go somewhere — the forest’s full of
dangerous beasts, everyone knows that. I do think he
might have told us prefects, at least.”
“And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school
song!” cried Dumbledore. Harry noticed that the other
teachers’ smiles had become rather fixed.
Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick, as if he was
trying to get a fly off the end, and a long golden
ribbon flew out of it, which rose high above the tables
and twisted itself, snakelike, into words.
“Everyone pick their favorite tune,” said Dumbledore,
“and off we go!”
And the school bellowed:
“Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,
Teach us something please,
Whether we be old and bald
Or young with scabby knees,
Our heads could do with filling
With some interesting stuff,
For now they’re bare and full of air,
Dead flies and bits of fluff,

So teach us things worth knowing,
Bring back what we’ve forgot,
Just do your best, we’ll do the rest,
And learn until our brains all rot.”
Everybody finished the song at different times. At last,
only the Weasley twins were left singing along to a
very slow funeral march. Dumbledore conducted their
last few lines with his wand and when they had
finished, he was one of those who clapped loudest.
“Ah, music,” he said, wiping his eyes. “A magic
beyond all we do here! And now, bedtime. Off you
trot!”
The Gryffindor first years followed Percy through the
chattering crowds, out of the Great Hall, and up the
marble staircase. Harry’s legs were like lead again,
but only because he was so tired and full of food. He
was too sleepy even to be surprised that the people in
the portraits along the corridors whispered and
pointed as they passed, or that twice Percy led them
through doorways hidden behind sliding panels and
hanging tapestries. They climbed more staircases,
yawning and dragging their feet, and Harry was just
wondering how much farther they had to go when
they came to a sudden halt.
A bundle of walking sticks was floating in midair
ahead of them, and as Percy took a step toward them
they started throwing themselves at him.
“Peeves,” Percy whispered to the first years. “A
poltergeist.” He raised his voice, “Peeves — show
yourself.”

A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a
balloon, answered.
“Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?”
There was a pop, and a little man with wicked, dark
eyes and a wide mouth appeared, floating cross-
legged in the air, clutching the walking sticks.
“Oooooooh!” he said, with an evil cackle. “Ickle
Firsties! What fun!”
He swooped suddenly at them. They all ducked.
“Go away, Peeves, or the Baron’ll hear about this, I
mean it!” barked Percy.
Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping
the walking sticks on Neville’s head. They heard him
zooming away, rattling coats of armor as he passed.
“You want to watch out for Peeves,” said Percy, as
they set off again. “The Bloody Baron’s the only one
who can control him, he won’t even listen to us
prefects. Here we are.”
At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a
very fat woman in a pink silk dress.
“Password?” she said.
“Caput Draconis,” said Percy, and the portrait swung
forward to reveal a round hole in the wall. They all
scrambled through it — Neville needed a leg up —
and found themselves in the Gryffindor common
room, a cozy, round room full of squashy armchairs.
Percy directed the girls through one door to their
dormitory and the boys through another. At the top of

a spiral staircase — they were obviously in one of the
towers — they found their beds at last: five four-
posters hung with deep red, velvet curtains. Their
trunks had already been brought up. Too tired to talk
much, they pulled on their pajamas and fell into bed.
“Great food, isn’t it?” Ron muttered to Harry through
the hangings. “Get off Scabbers! He’s chewing my
sheets.”
Harry was going to ask Ron if he’d had any of the
treacle tart, but he fell asleep almost at once.
Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because he
had a very strange dream. He was wearing Professor
Quirrell’s turban, which kept talking to him, telling
him he must transfer to Slytherin at once, because it
was his destiny. Harry told the turban he didn’t want
to be in Slytherin; it got heavier and heavier; he tried
to pull it off but it tightened painfully — and there
was Malfoy, laughing at him as he struggled with it —
then Malfoy turned into the hook-nosed teacher,
Snape, whose laugh became high and cold — there
was a burst of green light and Harry woke, sweating
and shaking.
He rolled over and fell asleep again, and when he
woke next day, he didn’t remember the dream at all.

THE POTIONS MASTER
“There, look.”
“Where?”
“Next to the tall kid with the red hair.”
“Wearing the glasses?”
“Did you see his face?”
“Did you see his scar?”
Whispers followed Harry from the moment he left his
dormitory the next day. People lining up outside
classrooms stood on tiptoe to get a look at him, or
doubled back to pass him in the corridors again,
staring. Harry wished they wouldn’t, because he was
trying to concentrate on finding his way to classes.
There were a hundred and forty-two staircases at
Hogwarts: wide, sweeping ones; narrow, rickety ones;
some that led somewhere different on a Friday; some

with a vanishing step halfway up that you had to
remember to jump. Then there were doors that
wouldn’t open unless you asked politely, or tickled
them in exactly the right place, and doors that weren’t
really doors at all, but solid walls just pretending. It
was also very hard to remember where anything was,
because it all seemed to move around a lot. The
people in the portraits kept going to visit each other,
and Harry was sure the coats of armor could walk.
The ghosts didn’t help, either. It was always a nasty
shock when one of them glided suddenly through a
door you were trying to open. Nearly Headless Nick
was always happy to point new Gryffindors in the
right direction, but Peeves the Poltergeist was worth
two locked doors and a trick staircase if you met him
when you were late for class. He would drop
wastepaper baskets on your head, pull rugs from
under your feet, pelt you with bits of chalk, or sneak
up behind you, invisible, grab your nose, and screech,
“GOT YOUR CONK!”
Even worse than Peeves, if that was possible, was the
caretaker, Argus Filch. Harry and Ron managed to get
on the wrong side of him on their very first morning.
Filch found them trying to force their way through a
door that unluckily turned out to be the entrance to
the out-of-bounds corridor on the third floor. He
wouldn’t believe they were lost, was sure they were
trying to break into it on purpose, and was
threatening to lock them in the dungeons when they
were rescued by Professor Quirrell, who was passing.
Filch owned a cat called Mrs. Norris, a scrawny, dust-
colored creature with bulging, lamplike eyes just like
Filch’s. She patrolled the corridors alone. Break a rule
in front of her, put just one toe out of line, and she’d
whisk off for Filch, who’d appear, wheezing, two
seconds later. Filch knew the secret passageways of

the school better than anyone (except perhaps the
Weasley twins) and could pop up as suddenly as any
of the ghosts. The students all hated him, and it was
the dearest ambition of many to give Mrs. Norris a
good kick.
And then, once you had managed to find them, there
were the classes themselves. There was a lot more to
magic, as Harry quickly found out, than waving your
wand and saying a few funny words.
They had to study the night skies through their
telescopes every Wednesday at midnight and learn
the names of different stars and the movements of the
planets. Three times a week they went out to the
greenhouses behind the castle to study Herbology,
with a dumpy little witch called Professor Sprout,
where they learned how to take care of all the strange
plants and fungi, and found out what they were used
for.
Easily the most boring class was History of Magic,
which was the only one taught by a ghost. Professor
Binns had been very old indeed when he had fallen
asleep in front of the staff room fire and got up next
morning to teach, leaving his body behind him. Binns
droned on and on while they scribbled down names
and dates, and got Emeric the Evil and Uric the
Oddball mixed up.
Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was a tiny
little wizard who had to stand on a pile of books to
see over his desk. At the start of their first class he
took the roll call, and when he reached Harry’s name
he gave an excited squeak and toppled out of sight.
Professor McGonagall was again different. Harry had
been quite right to think she wasn’t a teacher to

cross. Strict and clever, she gave them a talking- to
the moment they sat down in her first class.
“Transfiguration is some of the most complex and
dangerous magic you will learn at Hogwarts,” she
said. “Anyone messing around in my class will leave
and not come back. You have been warned.”
Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again.
They were all very impressed and couldn’t wait to get
started, but soon realized they weren’t going to be
changing the furniture into animals for a long time.
After taking a lot of complicated notes, they were each
given a match and started trying to turn it into a
needle. By the end of the lesson, only Hermione
Granger had made any difference to her match;
Professor McGonagall showed the class how it had
gone all silver and pointy and gave Hermione a rare
smile.
The class everyone had really been looking forward to
was Defense Against the Dark Arts, but Quirrell’s
lessons turned out to be a bit of a joke. His classroom
smelled strongly of garlic, which everyone said was to
ward off a vampire he’d met in Romania and was
afraid would be coming back to get him one of these
days. His turban, he told them, had been given to him
by an African prince as a thank-you for getting rid of
a troublesome zombie, but they weren’t sure they
believed this story. For one thing, when Seamus
Finnigan asked eagerly to hear how Quirrell had
fought off the zombie, Quirrell went pink and started
talking about the weather; for another, they had
noticed that a funny smell hung around the turban,
and the Weasley twins insisted that it was stuffed full
of garlic as well, so that Quirrell was protected
wherever he went.

Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasn’t
miles behind everyone else. Lots of people had come
from Muggle families and, like him, hadn’t had any
idea that they were witches and wizards. There was so
much to learn that even people like Ron didn’t have
much of a head start.
Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron. They
finally managed to find their way down to the Great
Hall for breakfast without getting lost once.
“What have we got today?” Harry asked Ron as he
poured sugar on his porridge.
“Double Potions with the Slytherins,” said Ron.
“Snape’s Head of Slytherin House. They say he always
favors them — we’ll be able to see if it’s true.”
“Wish McGonagall favored us,” said Harry. Professor
McGonagall was head of Gryffindor House, but it
hadn’t stopped her from giving them a huge pile of
homework the day before.
Just then, the mail arrived. Harry had gotten used to
this by now, but it had given him a bit of a shock on
the first morning, when about a hundred owls had
suddenly streamed into the Great Hall during
breakfast, circling the tables until they saw their
owners, and dropping letters and packages onto their
laps.
Hedwig hadn’t brought Harry anything so far. She
sometimes flew in to nibble his ear and have a bit of
toast before going off to sleep in the owlery with the
other school owls. This morning, however, she
fluttered down between the marmalade and the sugar
bowl and dropped a note onto Harry’s plate. Harry
tore it open at once. It said, in a very untidy scrawl:

Dear Harry,
I know you get Friday afternoons off so would you like
to come and have a cup of tea with me around three?
I want to hear all about your first week. Send us an
answer back with Hedwig.
Hagrid
Harry borrowed Ron’s quill, scribbled Yes, please, see
you later on the back of the note, and sent Hedwig off
again.
It was lucky that Harry had tea with Hagrid to look
forward to, because the Potions lesson turned out to
be the worst thing that had happened to him so far.
At the start-of-term banquet, Harry had gotten the
idea that Professor Snape disliked him. By the end of
the first Potions lesson, he knew he’d been wrong.
Snape didn’t dislike Harry — he hated him.
Potions lessons took place down in one of the
dungeons. It was colder here than up in the main
castle, and would have been quite creepy enough
without the pickled animals floating in glass jars all
around the walls.
Snape, like Flitwick, started the class by taking the
roll call, and like Flitwick, he paused at Harry’s name.
“Ah, yes,” he said softly, “Harry Potter. Our new —
celebrity.”
Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle
sniggered behind their hands. Snape finished calling
the names and looked up at the class. His eyes were
black like Hagrid ’s, but they had none of Hagrid ’s

warmth. They were cold and empty and made you
think of dark tunnels.
“You are here to learn the subtle science and exact art
of potion-making,” he began. He spoke in barely more
than a whisper, but they caught every word — like
Professor McGonagall, Snape had the gift of keeping a
class silent without effort. “As there is little foolish
wand- waving here, many of you will hardly believe
this is magic. I don’t expect you will really understand
the beauty of the softly simmering cauldron with its
shimmering fumes, the delicate power of liquids that
creep through human veins, bewitching the mind,
ensnaring the senses. ... I can teach you how to bottle
fame, brew glory, even stopper death — if you aren’t
as big a bunch of dunderheads as I usually have to
teach.”
More silence followed this little speech. Harry and
Ron exchanged looks with raised eyebrows. Hermione
Granger was on the edge of her seat and looked
desperate to start proving that she wasn’t a
dunderhead.
“Potter!” said Snape suddenly. “What would I get if I
added powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of
wormwood?”
Powdered root of what to an infusion of what? Harry
glanced at Ron, who looked as stumped as he was;
Hermione ’s hand had shot into the air.
“I don’t know, sir,” said Harry.
Snape ’s lips curled into a sneer.
“Tut, tut — fame clearly isn’t everything.”
He ignored Hermione ’s hand.

“Let’s try again. Potter, where would you look if I told
you to find me a bezoar?”
Hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as it
would go without her leaving her seat, but Harry
didn’t have the faintest idea what a bezoar was. He
tried not to look at Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, who
were shaking with laughter.
“I don’t know, sir.”
“Thought you wouldn’t open a book before coming,
eh, Potter?”
Harry forced himself to keep looking straight into
those cold eyes. He had looked through his books at
the Dursleys’, but did Snape expect him to remember
everything in One Thousand Magical Herbs and
Fungi ?
Snape was still ignoring Hermione’s quivering hand.
“What is the difference, Potter, between monkshood
and wolfsbane?”
At this, Hermione stood up, her hand stretching
toward the dungeon ceiling.
“I don’t know,” said Harry quietly. “I think Hermione
does, though, why don’t you try her?”
A few people laughed; Harry caught Seamus’s eye,
and Seamus winked. Snape, however, was not
pleased.
“Sit down,” he snapped at Hermione. “For your
information, Potter, asphodel and wormwood make a
sleeping potion so powerful it is known as the
Draught of Living Death. A bezoar is a stone taken

from the stomach of a goat and it will save you from
most poisons. As for monkshood and wolfsbane, they
are the same plant, which also goes by the name of
aconite. Well? Why aren’t you all copying that down?”
There was a sudden rummaging for quills and
parchment. Over the noise, Snape said, “And a point
will be taken from Gryffindor House for your cheek,
Potter.”
Things didn’t improve for the Gryffindors as the
Potions lesson continued. Snape put them all into
pairs and set them to mixing up a simple potion to
cure boils. He swept around in his long black cloak,
watching them weigh dried nettles and crush snake
fangs, criticizing almost everyone except Malfoy,
whom he seemed to like. He was just telling everyone
to look at the perfect way Malfoy had stewed his
horned slugs when clouds of acid green smoke and a
loud hissing filled the dungeon. Neville had somehow
managed to melt Seamus’s cauldron into a twisted
blob, and their potion was seeping across the stone
floor, burning holes in people’s shoes. Within
seconds, the whole class was standing on their stools
while Neville, who had been drenched in the potion
when the cauldron collapsed, moaned in pain as
angry red boils sprang up all over his arms and legs.
“Idiot boy!” snarled Snape, clearing the spilled potion
away with one wave of his wand. “I suppose you
added the porcupine quills before taking the cauldron
off the fire?”
Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over
his nose.
“Take him up to the hospital wing,” Snape spat at
Seamus. Then he rounded on Harry and Ron, who
had been working next to Neville.

“You — Potter — why didn’t you tell him not to add
the quills? Thought he’d make you look good if he got
it wrong, did you? That’s another point you’ve lost for
Gryffindor.”
This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth to
argue, but Ron kicked him behind their cauldron.
“Don’t push it,” he muttered, “I’ve heard Snape can
turn very nasty.”
As they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hour
later, Harry’s mind was racing and his spirits were
low. He’d lost two points for Gryffindor in his very
first week — why did Snape hate him so much?
“Cheer up,” said Ron, “Snape’s always taking points
off Fred and George. Can I come and meet Hagrid
with you?”
At five to three they left the castle and made their way
across the grounds. Hagrid lived in a small wooden
house on the edge of the forbidden forest. A crossbow
and a pair of galoshes were outside the front door.
When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling
from inside and several booming barks. Then Hagrid ’s
voice rang out, saying, “Back, Fang — back.”
Hagrid ’s big, hairy face appeared in the crack as he
pulled the door open.
“Hang on,” he said. “Back, Fang.”
He let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collar
of an enormous black boarhound.
There was only one room inside. Hams and pheasants
were hanging from the ceiling, a copper kettle was

boiling on the open fire, and in the corner stood a
massive bed with a patchwork quilt over it.
“Make yerselves at home,” said Hagrid, letting go of
Fang, who bounded straight at Ron and started
licking his ears. Like Hagrid, Fang was clearly not as
fierce as he looked.
“This is Ron,” Harry told Hagrid, who was pouring
boiling water into a large teapot and putting rock
cakes onto a plate.
“Another Weasley, eh?” said Hagrid, glancing at Ron’s
freckles. “I spent half me life chasin’ yer twin brothers
away from the forest.”
The rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisins
that almost broke their teeth, but Harry and Ron
pretended to be enjoying them as they told Hagrid all
about their first lessons. Fang rested his head on
Harry’s knee and drooled all over his robes.
Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid call
Filch “that old git.”
“An’ as fer that cat, Mrs. Norris, I’d like ter introduce
her to Fang sometime. D’yeh know, every time I go up
ter the school, she follows me everywhere? Can’t get
rid of her — Filch puts her up to it.”
Harry told Hagrid about Snape’s lesson. Hagrid, like
Ron, told Harry not to worry about it, that Snape
liked hardly any of the students.
“But he seemed to really hate me.”
“Rubbish!” said Hagrid. “Why should he?”

Yet Harry couldn’t help thinking that Hagrid didn’t
quite meet his eyes when he said that.
“How’s yer brother Charlie?” Hagrid asked Ron. “I
liked him a lot — great with animals.”
Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject on
purpose. While Ron told Hagrid all about Charlie’s
work with dragons, Harry picked up a piece of paper
that was lying on the table under the tea cozy. It was
a cutting from the Daily Prophet :
GRINGOTTS BREAK-IN LATEST
Investigations continue into the break-in at Gringotts
on 3 1 July, widely believed to be the work of Dark
wizards or witches unknown.
Gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing had
been taken. The vault that was searched had in fact
been emptied the same day.
“But we’re not telling you what was in there, so keep
your noses out if you know what’s good for you,” said
a Gringotts spokesgoblin this afternoon.
Harry remembered Ron telling him on the train that
someone had tried to rob Gringotts, but Ron hadn’t
mentioned the date.
“Hagrid!” said Harry, “that Gringotts break-in
happened on my birthday! It might’ve been happening
while we were there!”
There was no doubt about it, Hagrid definitely didn’t
meet Harry’s eyes this time. He grunted and offered
him another rock cake. Harry read the story again.
The vault that was searched had in fact been emptied
earlier that same day. Hagrid had emptied vault seven

hundred and thirteen, if you could call it emptying,
taking out that grubby little package. Had that been
what the thieves were looking for?
As Harry and Ron walked back to the castle for
dinner, their pockets weighed down with rock cakes
they’d been too polite to refuse, Harry thought that
none of the lessons he’d had so far had given him as
much to think about as tea with Hagrid. Had Hagrid
collected that package just in time? Where was it
now? And did Hagrid know something about Snape
that he didn’t want to tell Harry?

9
THE MIDNIGHT DUEL
Harry had never believed he would meet a boy he
hated more than Dudley, but that was before he met
Draco Malfoy. Still, first-year Gryffindors only had
Potions with the Slytherins, so they didn’t have to put
up with Malfoy much. Or at least, they didn’t until
they spotted a notice pinned up in the Gryffindor
common room that made them all groan. Flying
lessons would be starting on Thursday — and
Gryffindor and Slytherin would be learning together.
“Typical,” said Harry darkly. “Just what I always
wanted. To make a fool of myself on a broomstick in
front of Malfoy.”
He had been looking forward to learning to fly more
than anything else.
“You don’t know that you’ll make a fool of yourself,”
said Ron reasonably. “Anyway, I know Malfoy’s always
going on about how good he is at Quidditch, but I bet
that’s all talk.”

Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot. He
complained loudly about first years never getting on
the House Quidditch teams and told long, boastful
stories that always seemed to end with him narrowly
escaping Muggles in helicopters. He wasn’t the only
one, though: the way Seamus Finnigan told it, he’d
spent most of his childhood zooming around the
countryside on his broomstick. Even Ron would tell
anyone who’d listen about the time he’d almost hit a
hang glider on Charlie’s old broom. Everyone from
wizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly.
Ron had already had a big argument with Dean
Thomas, who shared their dormitory, about soccer.
Ron couldn’t see what was exciting about a game with
only one ball where no one was allowed to fly. Harry
had caught Ron prodding Dean’s poster of West Ham
soccer team, trying to make the players move.
Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life,
because his grandmother had never let him near one.
Privately, Harry felt she’d had good reason, because
Neville managed to have an extraordinary number of
accidents even with both feet on the ground.
Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about
flying as Neville was. This was something you couldn’t
learn by heart out of a book — not that she hadn’t
tried. At breakfast on Thursday she bored them all
stupid with flying tips she’d gotten out of a library
book called Quidditch Through the Ages. Neville was
hanging on to her every word, desperate for anything
that might help him hang on to his broomstick later,
but everybody else was very pleased when Hermione ’s
lecture was interrupted by the arrival of the mail.
Harry hadn’t had a single letter since Hagrid’s note,
something that Malfoy had been quick to notice, of
course. Malfoy ’s eagle owl was always bringing him

packages of sweets from home, which he opened
gloatingly at the Slytherin table.
A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his
grandmother. He opened it excitedly and showed
them a glass ball the size of a large marble, which
seemed to be full of white smoke.
“It’s a Remembrall!” he explained. “Gran knows I
forget things — this tells you if there’s something
you’ve forgotten to do. Look, you hold it tight like this
and if it turns red — oh ...” His face fell, because the
Remembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet, “... you’ve
forgotten something ...”
Neville was trying to remember what he’d forgotten
when Draco Malfoy, who was passing the Gryffindor
table, snatched the Remembrall out of his hand.
Harry and Ron jumped to their feet. They were half
hoping for a reason to fight Malfoy, but Professor
McGonagall, who could spot trouble quicker than any
teacher in the school, was there in a flash.
“What’s going on?”
“Malfoy’s got my Remembrall, Professor.”
Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall
back on the table.
“Just looking,” he said, and he sloped away with
Crabbe and Goyle behind him.
At three-thirty that afternoon, Harry, Ron, and the
other Gryffindors hurried down the front steps onto
the grounds for their first flying lesson. It was a clear,
breezy day, and the grass rippled under their feet as
they marched down the sloping lawns toward a

smooth, flat lawn on the opposite side of the grounds
to the forbidden forest, whose trees were swaying
darkly in the distance.
The Slytherins were already there, and so were twenty
broomsticks lying in neat lines on the ground. Harry
had heard Fred and George Weasley complain about
the school brooms, saying that some of them started
to vibrate if you flew too high, or always flew slightly
to the left.
Their teacher, Madam Hooch, arrived. She had short,
gray hair, and yellow eyes like a hawk.
“Well, what are you all waiting for?” she barked.
“Everyone stand by a broomstick. Come on, hurry
up.” "
Harry glanced down at his broom. It was old and
some of the twigs stuck out at odd angles.
“Stick out your right hand over your broom,” called
Madam Hooch at the front, “and say ‘Up!’ ”
“UP!” everyone shouted.
Harry’s broom jumped into his hand at once, but it
was one of the few that did. Hermione Granger’s had
simply rolled over on the ground, and Neville’s hadn’t
moved at all. Perhaps brooms, like horses, could tell
when you were afraid, thought Harry; there was a
quaver in Neville’s voice that said only too clearly that
he wanted to keep his feet on the ground.
Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount their
brooms without sliding off the end, and walked up
and down the rows correcting their grips. Harry and
Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy he’d been
doing it wrong for years.

“Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from the
ground, hard,” said Madam Hooch. “Keep your
brooms steady, rise a few feet, and then come straight
back down by leaning forward slightly. On my whistle
— three — two — ”
But Neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened of
being left on the ground, pushed off hard before the
whistle had touched Madam Hooch’s lips.
“Come back, boy!” she shouted, but Neville was rising
straight up like a cork shot out of a bottle — twelve
feet — twenty feet. Harry saw his scared white face
look down at the ground falling away, saw him gasp,
slip sideways off the broom and —
WHAM — a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay
facedown on the grass in a heap. His broomstick was
still rising higher and higher, and started to drift
lazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight.
Madam Hooch was bending over Neville, her face as
white as his.
“Broken wrist,” Harry heard her mutter. “Come on,
boy — it’s all right, up you get.”
She turned to the rest of the class.
“None of you is to move while I take this boy to the
hospital wing! You leave those brooms where they are
or you’ll be out of Hogwarts before you can say
‘Quidditch.’ Come on, dear.”
Neville, his face tear-streaked, clutching his wrist,
hobbled off with Madam Hooch, who had her arm
around him.

No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burst
into laughter.
“Did you see his face, the great lump?”
The other Slytherins joined in.
“Shut up, Malfoy,” snapped Parvati Patil.
“Ooh, sticking up for Longbottom?” said Pansy
Parkinson, a hard-faced Slytherin girl. “Never thought
you’d like fat little crybabies, Parvati.”
“Look!” said Malfoy, darting forward and snatching
something out of the grass. “It’s that stupid thing
Longbottom’s gran sent him.”
The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up.
“Give that here, Malfoy,” said Harry quietly. Everyone
stopped talking to watch.
Malfoy smiled nastily.
“I think I’ll leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find
— how about — up a tree?”
“Give it here!” Harry yelled, but Malfoy had leapt onto
his broomstick and taken off. He hadn’t been lying, he
could fly well. Hovering level with the topmost
branches of an oak he called, “Come and get it,
Potter!”
Harry grabbed his broom.
“iVo!” shouted Hermione Granger. “Madam Hooch told
us not to move — you’ll get us all into trouble.”

Harry ignored her. Blood was pounding in his ears.
He mounted the broom and kicked hard against the
ground and up, up he soared; air rushed through his
hair, and his robes whipped out behind him — and in
a rush of fierce joy he realized he’d found something
he could do without being taught — this was easy,
this was wonderful. He pulled his broomstick up a
little to take it even higher, and heard screams and
gasps of girls back on the ground and an admiring
whoop from Ron.
He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy in
midair. Malfoy looked stunned.
“Give it here,” Harry called, “or I’ll knock you off that
broom!”
“Oh, yeah?” said Malfoy, trying to sneer, but looking
worried.
Harry knew, somehow, what to do. He leaned forward
and grasped the broom tightly in both hands, and it
shot toward Malfoy like a javelin. Malfoy only just got
out of the way in time; Harry made a sharp about-
face and held the broom steady. A few people below
were clapping.
“No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck,
Malfoy,” Harry called.
The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy.
“Catch it if you can, then!” he shouted, and he threw
the glass ball high into the air and streaked back
toward the ground.
Harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise up
in the air and then start to fall. He leaned forward
and pointed his broom handle down — next second

he was gathering speed in a steep dive, racing the ball
— wind whistled in his ears, mingled with the
screams of people watching — he stretched out his
hand — a foot from the ground he caught it, just in
time to pull his broom straight, and he toppled gently
onto the grass with the Remembrall clutched safely in
his fist.
“HARRY POTTER!”
His heart sank faster than he’d just dived. Professor
McGonagall was running toward them. He got to his
feet, trembling.
“Never — in all my time at Hogwarts — ”
Professor McGonagall was almost speechless with
shock, and her glasses flashed furiously, “ — how dare
you — might have broken your neck — ”
“It wasn’t his fault, Professor — ”
“Be quiet, Miss Patil — ”
“But Malfoy — ”
“That’s enough, Mr. Weasley. Potter, follow me, now.”
Harry caught sight of Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle’s
triumphant faces as he left, walking numbly in
Professor McGonagall’s wake as she strode toward the
castle. He was going to be expelled, he just knew it.
He wanted to say something to defend himself, but
there seemed to be something wrong with his voice.
Professor McGonagall was sweeping along without
even looking at him; he had to jog to keep up. Now
he’d done it. He hadn’t even lasted two weeks. He’d be
packing his bags in ten minutes. What would the
Dursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep?

Up the front steps, up the marble staircase inside,
and still Professor McGonagall didn’t say a word to
him. She wrenched open doors and marched along
corridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her.
Maybe she was taking him to Dumbledore. He
thought of Hagrid, expelled but allowed to stay on as
gamekeeper. Perhaps he could be Hagrid’s assistant.
His stomach twisted as he imagined it, watching Ron
and the others becoming wizards while he stumped
around the grounds carrying Hagrid’s bag.
Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom.
She opened the door and poked her head inside.
“Excuse me, Professor Flitwick, could I borrow Wood
for a moment?”
Wood? thought Harry, bewildered; was Wood a cane
she was going to use on him?
But Wood turned out to be a person, a burly fifth-year
boy who came out of Flitwick’s class looking
confused.
“Follow me, you two,” said Professor McGonagall, and
they marched on up the corridor, Wood looking
curiously at Harry.
“In here.”
Professor McGonagall pointed them into a classroom
that was empty except for Peeves, who was busy
writing rude words on the blackboard.
“Out, Peeves!” she barked. Peeves threw the chalk
into a bin, which clanged loudly, and he swooped out
cursing. Professor McGonagall slammed the door
behind him and turned to face the two boys.

“Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood — I’ve found you a
Seeker.”
Wood’s expression changed from puzzlement to
delight.
“Are you serious, Professor?”
“Absolutely,” said Professor McGonagall crisply. “The
boy’s a natural. I’ve never seen anything like it. Was
that your first time on a broomstick, Potter?”
Harry nodded silently. He didn’t have a clue what was
going on, but he didn’t seem to be being expelled, and
some of the feeling started coming back to his legs.
“He caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-foot
dive,” Professor McGonagall told Wood. “Didn’t even
scratch himself. Charlie Weasley couldn’t have done
it.”
Wood was now looking as though all his dreams had
come true at once.
“Ever seen a game of Quidditch, Potter?” he asked
excitedly.
“Wood’s captain of the Gryffindor team,” Professor
McGonagall explained.
“He’s just the build for a Seeker, too,” said Wood, now
walking around Harry and staring at him. “Light —
speedy — we’ll have to get him a decent broom,
Professor — a Nimbus Two Thousand or a
Cleansweep Seven, I’d say.”
“I shall speak to Professor Dumbledore and see if we
can’t bend the first-year rule. Heaven knows, we need
a better team than last year. Flattened in that last

match by Slytherin, I couldn’t look Severus Snape in
the face for weeks. ...”
Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glasses
at Harry.
“I want to hear you’re training hard, Potter, or I may
change my mind about punishing you.”
Then she suddenly smiled.
“Your father would have been proud,” she said. “He
was an excellent Quidditch player himself.”
“You’re joking.”
It was dinnertime. Harry had just finished telling Ron
what had happened when he’d left the grounds with
Professor McGonagall. Ron had a piece of steak and
kidney pie halfway to his mouth, but he’d forgotten all
about it.
“Seeker?” he said. “But first years never — you must
be the youngest House player in about — ”
“ — a century,” said Harry, shoveling pie into his
mouth. He felt particularly hungry after the
excitement of the afternoon. “Wood told me.”
Ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat and
gaped at Harry.
“I start training next week,” said Harry. “Only don’t
tell anyone, Wood wants to keep it a secret.”
Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall,
spotted Harry, and hurried over.

“Well done,” said George in a low voice. “Wood told us.
We’re on the team too — Beaters.”
“I tell you, we’re going to win that Quidditch Cup for
sure this year,” said Fred. “We haven’t won since
Charlie left, but this year’s team is going to be
brilliant. You must be good, Harry, Wood was almost
skipping when he told us.”
“Anyway, we’ve got to go, Lee Jordan reckons he’s
found a new secret passageway out of the school.”
“Bet it’s that one behind the statue of Gregory the
Smarmy that we found in our first week. See you.”
Fred and George had hardly disappeared when
someone far less welcome turned up: Malfoy, flanked
by Crabbe and Goyle.
“Having a last meal, Potter? When are you getting the
train back to the Muggles?”
“You’re a lot braver now that you’re back on the
ground and you’ve got your little friends with you,”
said Harry coolly. There was of course nothing at all
little about Crabbe and Goyle, but as the High Table
was full of teachers, neither of them could do more
than crack their knuckles and scowl.
“I’d take you on anytime on my own,” said Malfoy.
“Tonight, if you want. Wizard’s duel. Wands only —
no contact. What’s the matter? Never heard of a
wizard’s duel before, I suppose?”
“Of course he has,” said Ron, wheeling around. “I’m
his second, who’s yours?”
Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle, sizing them up.

“Crabbe,” he said. “Midnight all right? Well meet you
in the trophy room; that’s always unlocked.”
When Malfoy had gone, Ron and Harry looked at each
other.
“What is a wizard’s duel?” said Harry. “And what do
you mean, you’re my second?”
“Well, a second’s there to take over if you die,” said
Ron casually, getting started at last on his cold pie.
Catching the look on Harry’s face, he added quickly,
“But people only die in proper duels, you know, with
real wizards. The most you and Malfoy’ll be able to do
is send sparks at each other. Neither of you knows
enough magic to do any real damage. I bet he
expected you to refuse, anyway.”
“And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens?”
“Throw it away and punch him on the nose,” Ron
suggested.
“Excuse me.”
They both looked up. It was Hermione Granger.
“Can’t a person eat in peace in this place?” said Ron.
Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry.
“I couldn’t help overhearing what you and Malfoy
were saying — ”
“Bet you could,” Ron muttered.
“ — and you mustn’t go wandering around the school
at night, think of the points you’ll lose Gryffindor if

you’re caught, and you’re bound to be. It’s really very
selfish of you.”
“And it’s really none of your business,” said Harry.
“Good-bye,” said Ron.
All the same, it wasn’t what you’d call the perfect end
to the day, Harry thought, as he lay awake much later
listening to Dean and Seamus falling asleep (Neville
wasn’t back from the hospital wing). Ron had spent
all evening giving him advice such as “If he tries to
curse you, you’d better dodge it, because I can’t
remember how to block them.” There was a very good
chance they were going to get caught by Filch or Mrs.
Norris, and Harry felt he was pushing his luck,
breaking another school rule today. On the other
hand, Malfoy’s sneering face kept looming up out of
the darkness — this was his big chance to beat
Malfoy face-to-face. He couldn’t miss it.
“Half-past eleven,” Ron muttered at last, “we’d better
go.”
They pulled on their bathrobes, picked up their
wands, and crept across the tower room, down the
spiral staircase, and into the Gryffindor common
room. A few embers were still glowing in the fireplace,
turning all the armchairs into hunched black
shadows. They had almost reached the portrait hole
when a voice spoke from the chair nearest them, “I
can’t believe you’re going to do this, Harry.”
A lamp flickered on. It was Hermione Granger,
wearing a pink bathrobe and a frown.
“You!” said Ron furiously. “Go back to bed!”

“I almost told your brother,” Hermione snapped,
“Percy — he’s a prefect, he’d put a stop to this.”
Harry couldn’t believe anyone could be so interfering.
“Come on,” he said to Ron. He pushed open the
portrait of the Fat Lady and climbed through the hole.
Hermione wasn’t going to give up that easily. She
followed Ron through the portrait hole, hissing at
them like an angry goose.
“Don’t you care about Gryffindor, do you only care
about yourselves, / don’t want Slytherin to win the
House Cup, and you’ll lose all the points I got from
Professor McGonagall for knowing about Switching
Spells.”
“Go away.”
“All right, but I warned you, you just remember what
I said when you’re on the train home tomorrow,
you’re so — ”
But what they were, they didn’t find out. Hermione
had turned to the portrait of the Fat Lady to get back
inside and found herself facing an empty painting.
The Fat Lady had gone on a nighttime visit and
Hermione was locked out of Gryffindor Tower.
“Now what am I going to do?” she asked shrilly.
“That’s your problem,” said Ron. “We’ve got to go,
we’re going to be late.”
They hadn’t even reached the end of the corridor
when Hermione caught up with them.
“I’m coming with you,” she said.

“You are not.”
“D’you think I’m going to stand out here and wait for
Filch to catch me? If he finds all three of us I’ll tell
him the truth, that I was trying to stop you, and you
can back me up.”
“You’ve got some nerve — ” said Ron loudly.
“Shut up, both of you!” said Harry sharply. “I heard
something.”
It was a sort of snuffling.
“Mrs. Norris?” breathed Ron, squinting through the
dark.
It wasn’t Mrs. Norris. It was Neville. He was curled up
on the floor, fast asleep, but jerked suddenly awake
as they crept nearer.
“Thank goodness you found me! I’ve been out here for
hours, I couldn’t remember the new password to get
in to bed.”
“Keep your voice down, Neville. The password’s ‘Pig
snout’ but it won’t help you now, the Fat Lady’s gone
off somewhere.”
“How’s your arm?” said Harry.
“Fine,” said Neville, showing them. “Madam Pomfrey
mended it in about a minute.”
“Good — well, look, Neville, we’ve got to be
somewhere, we’ll see you later — ”

“Don’t leave me!” said Neville, scrambling to his feet,
“I don’t want to stay here alone, the Bloody Baron’s
been past twice already.”
Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at
Hermione and Neville.
“If either of you get us caught, I’ll never rest until I’ve
learned that Curse of the Bogies Quirrell told us
about, and used it on you.”
Hermione opened her mouth, perhaps to tell Ron
exactly how to use the Curse of the Bogies, but Harry
hissed at her to be quiet and beckoned them all
forward.
They flitted along corridors striped with bars of
moonlight from the high windows. At every turn Harry
expected to run into Filch or Mrs. Norris, but they
were lucky. They sped up a staircase to the third floor
and tiptoed toward the trophy room.
Malfoy and Crabbe weren’t there yet. The crystal
trophy cases glimmered where the moonlight caught
them. Cups, shields, plates, and statues winked silver
and gold in the darkness. They edged along the walls,
keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of the
room. Harry took out his wand in case Malfoy leapt in
and started at once. The minutes crept by.
“He’s late, maybe he’s chickened out,” Ron whispered.
Then a noise in the next room made them jump.
Harry had only just raised his wand when they heard
someone speak — and it wasn’t Malfoy.
“Sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in a
corner.”

It was Filch speaking to Mrs. Norris. Horror-struck,
Harry waved madly at the other three to follow him as
quickly as possible; they scurried silently toward the
door, away from Filch’s voice. Neville’s robes had
barely whipped round the corner when they heard
Filch enter the trophy room.
“They’re in here somewhere,” they heard him mutter,
“probably hiding.”
“This way!” Harry mouthed to the others and,
petrified, they began to creep down a long gallery full
of suits of armor. They could hear Filch getting
nearer. Neville suddenly let out a frightened squeak
and broke into a run — he tripped, grabbed Ron
around the waist, and the pair of them toppled right
into a suit of armor.
The clanging and crashing were enough to wake the
whole castle.
“RUN!” Harry yelled, and the four of them sprinted
down the gallery, not looking back to see whether
Filch was following — they swung around the
doorpost and galloped down one corridor then
another, Harry in the lead, without any idea where
they were or where they were going — they ripped
through a tapestry and found themselves in a hidden
passageway, hurtled along it and came out near their
Charms classroom, which they knew was miles from
the trophy room.
“I think we’ve lost him,” Harry panted, leaning against
the cold wall and wiping his forehead. Neville was
bent double, wheezing and spluttering.
“I — told — you,” Hermione gasped, clutching at the
stitch in her chest, “I — told — you.”

“We’ve got to get back to Gryffindor Tower,” said Ron,
“quickly as possible.”
“Malfoy tricked you,” Hermione said to Harry. “You
realize that, don’t you? He was never going to meet
you — Filch knew someone was going to be in the
trophy room, Malfoy must have tipped him off.”
Harry thought she was probably right, but he wasn’t
going to tell her that.
“Let’s go.”
It wasn’t going to be that simple. They hadn’t gone
more than a dozen paces when a doorknob rattled
and something came shooting out of a classroom in
front of them.
It was Peeves. He caught sight of them and gave a
squeal of delight.
“Shut up, Peeves — please — you’ll get us thrown
out.”
Peeves cackled.
“Wandering around at midnight, Ickle Firsties? Tut,
tut, tut. Naughty, naughty, you’ll get caughty.”
“Not if you don’t give us away, Peeves, please.”
“Should tell Filch, I should,” said Peeves in a sanity
voice, but his eyes glittered wickedly. “It’s for your
own good, you know.”
“Get out of the way,” snapped Ron, taking a swipe at
Peeves — this was a big mistake.

“STUDENTS OUT OF BED!” Peeves bellowed,
“STUDENTS OUT OF BED DOWN THE CHARMS
CORRIDOR!”
Ducking under Peeves, they ran for their lives, right
to the end of the corridor where they slammed into a
door — and it was locked.
“This is it!” Ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly at
the door, “We’re done for! This is the end!”
They could hear footsteps, Filch running as fast as he
could toward Peeves ’s shouts.
“Oh, move over,” Hermione snarled. She grabbed
Harry’s wand, tapped the lock, and whispered,
“Alohomora\”
The lock clicked and the door swung open — they
piled through it, shut it quickly, and pressed their
ears against it, listening.
“Which way did they go, Peeves?” Filch was saying.
“Quick, tell me.”
“Say ‘please.’ ”
“Don’t mess with me, Peeves, now where did they go?”
“Shan’t say nothing if you don’t say please,” said
Peeves in his annoying singsong voice.
“All right — please.”
“NOTHING! Ha haaa! Told you I wouldn’t say nothing
if you didn’t say please! Ha ha! Haaaaaa!” And they
heard the sound of Peeves whooshing away and Filch
cursing in rage.

“He thinks this door is locked,” Harry whispered. “I
think well be okay — get off Neville!” For Neville had
been tugging on the sleeve of Harry’s bathrobe for the
last minute. “What?”
Harry turned around — and saw, quite clearly, what.
For a moment, he was sure he’d walked into a
nightmare — this was too much, on top of everything
that had happened so far.
They weren’t in a room, as he had supposed. They
were in a corridor. The forbidden corridor on the third
floor. And now they knew why it was forbidden.
They were looking straight into the eyes of a
monstrous dog, a dog that filled the whole space
between ceiling and floor. It had three heads. Three
pairs of rolling, mad eyes; three noses, twitching and
quivering in their direction; three drooling mouths,
saliva hanging in slippery ropes from yellowish fangs.
It was standing quite still, all six eyes staring at them,
and Harry knew that the only reason they weren’t
already dead was that their sudden appearance had
taken it by surprise, but it was quickly getting over
that, there was no mistaking what those thunderous
growls meant.
Harry groped for the doorknob — between Filch and
death, he’d take Filch.
They fell backward — Harry slammed the door shut,
and they ran, they almost flew, back down the
corridor. Filch must have hurried off to look for them
somewhere else, because they didn’t see him
anywhere, but they hardly cared — all they wanted to
do was put as much space as possible between them
and that monster. They didn’t stop running until they

reached the portrait of the Fat Lady on the seventh
floor.
“Where on earth have you all been?” she asked,
looking at their bathrobes hanging off their shoulders
and their flushed, sweaty faces.
“Never mind that — pig snout, pig snout,” panted
Harry, and the portrait swung forward. They
scrambled into the common room and collapsed,
trembling, into armchairs.
It was a while before any of them said anything.
Neville, indeed, looked as if he’d never speak again.
“What do they think they’re doing, keeping a thing
like that locked up in a school?” said Ron finally. “If
any dog needs exercise, that one does.”
Hermione had got both her breath and her bad
temper back again.
“You don’t use your eyes, any of you, do you?” she
snapped. “Didn’t you see what it was standing on?”
“The floor?” Harry suggested. “I wasn’t looking at its
feet, I was too busy with its heads.”
“No, not the floor. It was standing on a trapdoor. It’s
obviously guarding something.”
She stood up, glaring at them.
“I hope you’re pleased with yourselves. We could all
have been killed — or worse, expelled. Now, if you
don’t mind, I’m going to bed.”
Ron stared after her, his mouth open.

“No, we don’t mind,” he said. “You’d think we dragged
her along, wouldn’t you?”
But Hermione had given Harry something else to
think about as he climbed back into bed. The dog was
guarding something. . . . What had Hagrid said?
Gringotts was the safest place in the world for
something you wanted to hide — except perhaps
Hogwarts.
It looked as though Harry had found out where the
grubby little package from vault seven hundred and
thirteen was.

10
HALLOWEEN
Malfoy couldn’t believe his eyes when he saw that
Harry and Ron were still at Hogwarts the next day,
looking tired but perfectly cheerful. Indeed, by the
next morning Harry and Ron thought that meeting
the three-headed dog had been an excellent
adventure, and they were quite keen to have another
one. In the meantime, Harry filled Ron in about the
package that seemed to have been moved from
Gringotts to Hogwarts, and they spent a lot of time
wondering what could possibly need such heavy
protection.
“It’s either really valuable or really dangerous,” said
Ron.
“Or both,” said Harry.
But as all they knew for sure about the mysterious
object was that it was about two inches long, they
didn’t have much chance of guessing what it was
without further clues.

Neither Neville nor Hermione showed the slightest
interest in what lay underneath the dog and the
trapdoor. All Neville cared about was never going near
the dog again.
Hermione was now refusing to speak to Harry and
Ron, but she was such a bossy know-it-all that they
saw this as an added bonus. All they really wanted
now was a way of getting back at Malfoy, and to their
great delight, just such a thing arrived in the mail
about a week later.
As the owls flooded into the Great Hall as usual,
everyone’s attention was caught at once by a long,
thin package carried by six large screech owls. Harry
was just as interested as everyone else to see what
was in this large parcel, and was amazed when the
owls soared down and dropped it right in front of him,
knocking his bacon to the floor. They had hardly
fluttered out of the way when another owl dropped a
letter on top of the parcel.
Harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky,
because it said:
DO NOT OPEN THE PARCEL AT THE TABLE.
It contains your new Nimbus Two Thousand, but I
don’t want everybody knowing you’ve got a
broomstick or they’ll all want one. Oliver Wood will
meet you tonight on the Quidditch field at seven
o’clock for your first training session.
Professor M. McGonagall
Harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the
note to Ron to read.

“A Nimbus Two Thousand!” Ron moaned enviously.
“I’ve never even touched one.”
They left the hall quickly, wanting to unwrap the
broomstick in private before their first class, but
halfway across the entrance hall they found the way
upstairs barred by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy seized
the package from Harry and felt it.
“That’s a broomstick,” he said, throwing it back to
Harry with a mixture of jealousy and spite on his face.
“You’ll be in for it this time, Potter, first years aren’t
allowed them.”
Ron couldn’t resist it.
“It’s not any old broomstick,” he said, “it’s a Nimbus
Two Thousand. What did you say you’ve got at home,
Malfoy, a Comet Two Sixty?” Ron grinned at Harry.
“Comets look flashy, but they’re not in the same
league as the Nimbus.”
“What would you know about it, Weasley, you
couldn’t afford half the handle,” Malfoy snapped back.
“I suppose you and your brothers have to save up
twig by twig.”
Before Ron could answer, Professor Flitwick appeared
at Malfoy’s elbow.
“Not arguing, I hope, boys?” he squeaked.
“Potters been sent a broomstick, Professor,” said
Malfoy quickly.
“Yes, yes, that’s right,” said Professor Flitwick,
beaming at Harry. “Professor McGonagall told me all
about the special circumstances, Potter. And what
model is it?”

“A Nimbus Two Thousand, sir,” said Harry, fighting
not to laugh at the look of horror on Malfoy’s face.
“And it’s really thanks to Malfoy here that I’ve got it,”
he added.
Harry and Ron headed upstairs, smothering their
laughter at Malfoy’s obvious rage and confusion.
“Well, it’s true,” Harry chortled as they reached the
top of the marble staircase, “If he hadn’t stolen
Neville’s Remembrall I wouldn’t be on the team. ...”
“So I suppose you think that’s a reward for breaking
rules?” came an angry voice from just behind them.
Hermione was stomping up the stairs, looking
disapprovingly at the package in Harry’s hand.
“I thought you weren’t speaking to us?” said Harry.
“Yes, don’t stop now,” said Ron, “it’s doing us so
much good.”
Hermione marched away with her nose in the air.
Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his
lessons that day. It kept wandering up to the
dormitory where his new broomstick was lying under
his bed, or straying off to the Quidditch field where
he’d be learning to play that night. He bolted his
dinner that evening without noticing what he was
eating, and then rushed upstairs with Ron to unwrap
the Nimbus Two Thousand at last.
“Wow,” Ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled onto
Harry’s bedspread.
Even Harry, who knew nothing about the different
brooms, thought it looked wonderful. Sleek and
shiny, with a mahogany handle, it had a long tail of

neat, straight twigs and Nimbus Two Thousand
written in gold near the top.
As seven o’clock drew nearer, Harry left the castle and
set off in the dusk toward the Quidditch field. He’d
never been inside the stadium before. Hundreds of
seats were raised in stands around the field so that
the spectators were high enough to see what was
going on. At either end of the field were three golden
poles with hoops on the end. They reminded Harry of
the little plastic sticks Muggle children blew bubbles
through, except that they were fifty feet high.
Too eager to fly again to wait for Wood, Harry
mounted his broomstick and kicked off from the
ground. What a feeling — he swooped in and out of
the goal posts and then sped up and down the field.
The Nimbus Two Thousand turned wherever he
wanted at his lightest touch.
“Hey, Potter, come down!”
Oliver Wood had arrived. He was carrying a large
wooden crate under his arm. Harry landed next to
him.
“Very nice,” said Wood, his eyes glinting. “I see what
McGonagall meant ... you really are a natural. I’m
just going to teach you the rules this evening, then
you’ll be joining team practice three times a week.”
He opened the crate. Inside were four different-sized
balls.
“Right,” said Wood. “Now, Quidditch is easy enough to
understand, even if it’s not too easy to play. There are
seven players on each side. Three of them are called
Chasers.”

“Three Chasers,” Harry repeated, as Wood took out a
bright red ball about the size of a soccer ball.
“This ball’s called the Quaffle,” said Wood. “The
Chasers throw the Quaffle to each other and try and
get it through one of the hoops to score a goal. Ten
points every time the Quaffle goes through one of the
hoops. Follow me?”
“The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through
the hoops to score,” Harry recited. “So — that’s sort of
like basketball on broomsticks with six hoops, isn’t
it?”
“What’s basketball?” said Wood curiously.
“Never mind,” said Harry quickly.
“Now, there’s another player on each side who’s called
the Keeper — I’m Keeper for Gryffindor. I have to fly
around our hoops and stop the other team from
scoring.”
“Three Chasers, one Keeper,” said Harry, who was
determined to remember it all. “And they play with
the Quaffle. Okay, got that. So what are they for?” He
pointed at the three balls left inside the box.
“I’ll show you now,” said Wood. “Take this.”
He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a short
baseball bat.
“I’m going to show you what the Bludgers do,” Wood
said. “These two are the Bludgers.”
He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black and
slightly smaller than the red Quaffle. Harry noticed

that they seemed to be straining to escape the straps
holding them inside the box.
“Stand back,” Wood warned Harry. He bent down and
freed one of the Bludgers.
At once, the black ball rose high in the air and then
pelted straight at Harry’s face. Harry swung at it with
the bat to stop it from breaking his nose, and sent it
zigzagging away into the air — it zoomed around their
heads and then shot at Wood, who dived on top of it
and managed to pin it to the ground.
“See?” Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludger
back into the crate and strapping it down safely. “The
Bludgers rocket around, trying to knock players off
their brooms. That’s why you have two Beaters on
each team — the Weasley twins are ours — it’s their
job to protect their side from the Bludgers and try and
knock them toward the other team. So — think you’ve
got all that?”
“Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle; the
Keeper guards the goal posts; the Beaters keep the
Bludgers away from their team,” Harry reeled off.
“Very good,” said Wood.
“Er — have the Bludgers ever killed anyone?” Harry
asked, hoping he sounded offhand.
“Never at Hogwarts. We’ve had a couple of broken
jaws but nothing worse than that. Now, the last
member of the team is the Seeker. That’s you. And
you don’t have to worry about the Quaffle or the
Bludgers — ”
“ — unless they crack my head open.”

“Don’t worry, the Weasleys are more than a match for
the Bludgers — I mean, they’re like a pair of human
Bludgers themselves.”
Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth
and last ball. Compared with the Quaffle and the
Bludgers, it was tiny, about the size of a large walnut.
It was bright gold and had little fluttering silver
wings.
“This,” said Wood, “is the Golden Snitch, and it’s the
most important ball of the lot. It’s very hard to catch
because it’s so fast and difficult to see. It’s the
Seeker’s job to catch it. You’ve got to weave in and out
of the Chasers, Beaters, Bludgers, and Quaffle to get
it before the other team’s Seeker, because whichever
Seeker catches the Snitch wins his team an extra
hundred and fifty points, so they nearly always win.
That’s why Seekers get fouled so much. A game of
Quidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught, so it
can go on for ages — I think the record is three
months, they had to keep bringing on substitutes so
the players could get some sleep.
“Well, that’s it — any questions?”
Harry shook his head. He understood what he had to
do all right, it was doing it that was going to be the
problem.
“We won’t practice with the Snitch yet,” said Wood,
carefully shutting it back inside the crate, “it’s too
dark, we might lose it. Let’s try you out with a few of
these.”
He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket
and a few minutes later, he and Harry were up in the
air, Wood throwing the golf balls as hard as he could
in every direction for Harry to catch.

Harry didn’t miss a single one, and Wood was
delighted. After half an hour, night had really fallen
and they couldn’t carry on.
“That Quidditch Cup’ll have our name on it this year,”
said Wood happily as they trudged back up to the
castle. “I wouldn’t be surprised if you turn out better
than Charlie Weasley, and he could have played for
England if he hadn’t gone off chasing dragons.”
Perhaps it was because he was now so busy, what
with Quidditch practice three evenings a week on top
of all his homework, but Harry could hardly believe it
when he realized that he’d already been at Hogwarts
two months. The castle felt more like home than
Privet Drive ever had. His lessons, too, were becoming
more and more interesting now that they had
mastered the basics.
On Halloween morning they woke to the delicious
smell of baking pumpkin wafting through the
corridors. Even better, Professor Flitwick announced
in Charms that he thought they were ready to start
making objects fly, something they had all been dying
to try since they’d seen him make Neville’s toad zoom
around the classroom. Professor Flitwick put the
class into pairs to practice. Harry’s partner was
Seamus Finnigan (which was a relief, because Neville
had been trying to catch his eye). Ron, however, was
to be working with Hermione Granger. It was hard to
tell whether Ron or Hermione was angrier about this.
She hadn’t spoken to either of them since the day
Harry’s broomstick had arrived.
“Now, don’t forget that nice wrist movement we’ve
been practicing!” squeaked Professor Flitwick,
perched on top of his pile of books as usual. “Swish
and flick, remember, swish and flick. And saying the
magic words properly is very important, too — never

forget Wizard Baruffio, who said ‘s’ instead of ‘f and
found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his
chest.”
It was very difficult. Harry and Seamus swished and
flicked, but the feather they were supposed to be
sending skyward just lay on the desktop. Seamus got
so impatient that he prodded it with his wand and set
fire to it — Harry had to put it out with his hat.
Ron, at the next table, wasn’t having much more
luck.
“Wingardium Leviosal” he shouted, waving his long
arms like a windmill.
“You’re saying it wrong,” Harry heard Hermione snap.
“It’s Wing-gar-dium Levi-o-sa, make the ‘gar’ nice and
long.”
“You do it, then, if you’re so clever,” Ron snarled.
Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked
her wand, and said, “Wingardium LeviosaV’
Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four
feet above their heads.
“Oh, well done!” cried Professor Flitwick, clapping.
“Everyone see here, Miss Granger’s done it!”
Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class.
“It’s no wonder no one can stand her,” he said to
Harry as they pushed their way into the crowded
corridor, “she’s a nightmare, honestly.”

Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past
him. It was Hermione. Harry caught a glimpse of her
face — and was startled to see that she was in tears.
“I think she heard you.”
“So?” said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable.
“She must’ve noticed she’s got no friends.”
Hermione didn’t turn up for the next class and wasn’t
seen all afternoon. On their way down to the Great
Hall for the Halloween feast, Harry and Ron overheard
Parvati Patil telling her friend Lavender that Hermione
was crying in the girls’ bathroom and wanted to be
left alone. Ron looked still more awkward at this, but
a moment later they had entered the Great Hall,
where the Halloween decorations put Hermione out of
their minds.
A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and
ceiling while a thousand more swooped over the
tables in low black clouds, making the candles in the
pumpkins stutter. The feast appeared suddenly on
the golden plates, as it had at the start-of-term
banquet.
Harry was just helping himself to a baked potato
when Professor Quirrell came sprinting into the hall,
his turban askew and terror on his face. Everyone
stared as he reached Professor Dumbledore’s chair,
slumped against the table, and gasped, “Troll — in
the dungeons — thought you ought to know.”
He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.
There was an uproar. It took several purple
firecrackers exploding from the end of Professor
Dumbledore’s wand to bring silence.

“Prefects,” he rumbled, “lead your Houses back to the
dormitories immediately!”
Percy was in his element.
“Follow me! Stick together, first years! No need to fear
the troll if you follow my orders! Stay close behind
me, now. Make way, first years coming through!
Excuse me, I’m a prefect!”
“How could a troll get in?” Harry asked as they
climbed the stairs.
“Don’t ask me, they’re supposed to be really stupid,”
said Ron. “Maybe Peeves let it in for a Halloween
joke.”
They passed different groups of people hurrying in
different directions. As they jostled their way through
a crowd of confused Hufflepuffs, Harry suddenly
grabbed Ron’s arm.
“I’ve just thought — Hermione.”
“What about her?”
“She doesn’t know about the troll.”
Ron bit his lip.
“Oh, all right,” he snapped. “But Percy’d better not
see us.”
Ducking down, they joined the Hufflepuffs going the
other way, slipped down a deserted side corridor, and
hurried off toward the girls’ bathroom. They had just
turned the corner when they heard quick footsteps
behind them.

“Percy!” hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a large
stone griffin.
Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy but
Snape. He crossed the corridor and disappeared from
view.
“What’s he doing?” Harry whispered. “Why isn’t he
down in the dungeons with the rest of the teachers?”
“Search me.”
Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor
after Snape ’s fading footsteps.
“He’s heading for the third floor,” Harry said, but Ron
held up his hand.
“Can you smell something?”
Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, a
mixture of old socks and the kind of public toilet no
one seems to clean.
And then they heard it — a low grunting, and the
shuffling footfalls of gigantic feet. Ron pointed — at
the end of a passage to the left, something huge was
moving toward them. They shrank into the shadows
and watched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight.
It was a horrible sight. Twelve feet tall, its skin was a
dull, granite gray, its great lumpy body like a boulder
with its small bald head perched on top like a
coconut. It had short legs thick as tree trunks with
flat, horny feet. The smell coming from it was
incredible. It was holding a huge wooden club, which
dragged along the floor because its arms were so long.

The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside.
It waggled its long ears, making up its tiny mind, then
slouched slowly into the room.
“The key’s in the lock,” Harry muttered. “We could
lock it in.”
“Good idea,” said Ron nervously.
They edged toward the open door, mouths dry,
praying the troll wasn’t about to come out of it. With
one great leap, Harry managed to grab the key, slam
the door, and lock it.
“Yes!”
Flushed with their victory, they started to run back
up the passage, but as they reached the corner they
heard something that made their hearts stop — a
high, petrified scream — and it was coming from the
chamber they’d just chained up.
“Oh, no,” said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.
“It’s the girls’ bathroom!” Harry gasped.
“ Hermionel” they said together.
It was the last thing they wanted to do, but what
choice did they have? Wheeling around, they sprinted
back to the door and turned the key, fumbling in their
panic. Harry pulled the door open and they ran
inside.
Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall
opposite, looking as if she was about to faint. The troll
was advancing on her, knocking the sinks off the
walls as it went.

“Confuse it!” Harry said desperately to Ron, and,
seizing a tap, he threw it as hard as he could against
the wall.
The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione. It
lumbered around, blinking stupidly, to see what had
made the noise. Its mean little eyes saw Harry. It
hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its club
as it went.
“Oy, pea-brain!” yelled Ron from the other side of the
chamber, and he threw a metal pipe at it. The troll
didn’t even seem to notice the pipe hitting its
shoulder, but it heard the yell and paused again,
turning its ugly snout toward Ron instead, giving
Harry time to run around it.
“Come on, run, run\” Harry yelled at Hermione, trying
to pull her toward the door, but she couldn’t move,
she was still flat against the wall, her mouth open
with terror.
The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the
troll berserk. It roared again and started toward Ron,
who was nearest and had no way to escape.
Harry then did something that was both very brave
and very stupid: He took a great running jump and
managed to fasten his arms around the troll’s neck
from behind. The troll couldn’t feel Harry hanging
there, but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bit
of wood up its nose, and Harry’s wand had still been
in his hand when he’d jumped — it had gone straight
up one of the troll’s nostrils.
Howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed its
club, with Harry clinging on for dear life; any second,
the troll was going to rip him off or catch him a
terrible blow with the club.

Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; Ron pulled
out his own wand — not knowing what he was going
to do he heard himself cry the first spell that came
into his head: “Wingardium Leviosal”
The club flew suddenly out of the troll’s hand, rose
high, high up into the air, turned slowly over — and
dropped, with a sickening crack, onto its owner’s
head. The troll swayed on the spot and then fell flat
on its face, with a thud that made the whole room
tremble.
Harry got to his feet. He was shaking and out of
breath. Ron was standing there with his wand still
raised, staring at what he had done.
It was Hermione who spoke first.
“Is it — dead?”
“I don’t think so,” said Harry, “I think it’s just been
knocked out.”
He bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll’s
nose. It was covered in what looked like lumpy gray
glue.
“Urgh — troll boogers.”
He wiped it on the troll’s trousers.
A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the
three of them look up. They hadn’t realized what a
racket they had been making, but of course, someone
downstairs must have heard the crashes and the
troll’s roars. A moment later, Professor McGonagall
had come bursting into the room, closely followed by
Snape, with Quirrell bringing up the rear. Quirrell

took one look at the troll, let out a faint whimper, and
sat quickly down on a toilet, clutching his heart.
Snape bent over the troll. Professor McGonagall was
looking at Ron and Harry. Harry had never seen her
look so angry. Her lips were white. Hopes of winning
fifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harry’s
mind.
“What on earth were you thinking of?” said Professor
McGonagall, with cold fury in her voice. Harry looked
at Ron, who was still standing with his wand in the
air. “You’re lucky you weren’t killed. Why aren’t you
in your dormitory?”
Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look. Harry looked
at the floor. He wished Ron would put his wand down.
Then a small voice came out of the shadows.
“Please, Professor McGonagall — they were looking for
me.”
“Miss Granger!”
Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.
“I went looking for the troll because I — I thought I
could deal with it on my own — you know, because
I’ve read all about them.”
Ron dropped his wand. Hermione Granger, telling a
downright lie to a teacher?
“If they hadn’t found me, I’d be dead now. Harry
stuck his wand up its nose and Ron knocked it out
with its own club. They didn’t have time to come and
fetch anyone. It was about to finish me off when they
arrived.”

Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story
wasn’t new to them.
“Well — in that case ...” said Professor McGonagall,
staring at the three of them, “Miss Granger, you
foolish girl, how could you think of tackling a
mountain troll on your own?”
Hermione hung her head. Harry was speechless.
Hermione was the last person to do anything against
the rules, and here she was, pretending she had, to
get them out of trouble. It was as if Snape had started
handing out sweets.
“Miss Granger, five points will be taken from
Gryffindor for this,” said Professor McGonagall. “I’m
very disappointed in you. If you’re not hurt at all,
you’d better get off to Gryffindor Tower. Students are
finishing the feast in their Houses.”
Hermione left.
Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron.
“Well, I still say you were lucky, but not many first
years could have taken on a full-grown mountain
troll. You each win Gryffindor five points. Professor
Dumbledore will be informed of this. You may go.”
They hurried out of the chamber and didn’t speak at
all until they had climbed two floors up. It was a relief
to be away from the smell of the troll, quite apart from
anything else.
“We should have gotten more than ten points,” Ron
grumbled.
“Five, you mean, once she’s taken off Hermione ’s.”

“Good of her to get us out of trouble like that,” Ron
admitted. “Mind you, we did save her.”
“She might not have needed saving if we hadn’t
locked the thing in with her,” Harry reminded him.
They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady.
“Pig snout,” they said and entered.
The common room was packed and noisy. Everyone
was eating the food that had been sent up. Hermione,
however, stood alone by the door, waiting for them.
There was a very embarrassed pause. Then, none of
them looking at each other, they all said “Thanks,”
and hurried off to get plates.
But from that moment on, Hermione Granger became
their friend. There are some things you can’t share
without ending up liking each other, and knocking
out a twelve-foot mountain troll is one of them.

QUIDDITCH
As they entered November, the weather turned very
cold. The mountains around the school became icy
gray and the lake like chilled steel. Every morning the
ground was covered in frost. Hagrid could be seen
from the upstairs windows defrosting broomsticks on
the Quidditch field, bundled up in a long moleskin
overcoat, rabbit fur gloves, and enormous beaverskin
boots.
The Quidditch season had begun. On Saturday, Harry
would be playing in his first match after weeks of
training: Gryffindor versus Slytherin. If Gryffindor
won, they would move up into second place in the
House Championship.
Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Wood
had decided that, as their secret weapon, Harry
should be kept, well, secret. But the news that he was
playing Seeker had leaked out somehow, and Harry
didn’t know which was worse — people telling him
he’d be brilliant or people telling him they’d be
running around underneath him holding a mattress.

It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermione as a
friend. He didn’t know how he’d have gotten through
all his homework without her, what with all the last-
minute Quidditch practice Wood was making them
do. She had also lent him Quidditch Through the Ages,
which turned out to be a very interesting read.
Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of
committing a Quidditch foul and that all of them had
happened during a World Cup match in 1473; that
Seekers were usually the smallest and fastest players,
and that most serious Quidditch accidents seemed to
happen to them; that although people rarely died
playing Quidditch, referees had been known to vanish
and turn up months later in the Sahara Desert.
Hermione had become a bit more relaxed about
breaking rules since Harry and Ron had saved her
from the mountain troll, and she was much nicer for
it. The day before Harry’s first Quidditch match the
three of them were out in the freezing courtyard
during break, and she had conjured them up a bright
blue fire that could be carried around in a jam jar.
They were standing with their backs to it, getting
warm, when Snape crossed the yard. Harry noticed at
once that Snape was limping. Harry, Ron, and
Hermione moved closer together to block the fire from
view; they were sure it wouldn’t be allowed.
Unfortunately, something about their guilty faces
caught Snape’s eye. He limped over. He hadn’t seen
the fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason to
tell them off anyway.
“What’s that you’ve got there, Potter?”
It was Quidditch Through the Ages. Harry showed him.

“Library books are not to be taken outside the
school,” said Snape. “Give it to me. Five points from
Gryffindor.”
“He’s just made that rule up,” Harry muttered angrily
as Snape limped away. “Wonder what’s wrong with
his leg?”
“Dunno, but I hope it’s really hurting him,” said Ron
bitterly.
The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that
evening. Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat together next
to a window. Hermione was checking Harry and Ron’s
Charms homework for them. She would never let
them copy (“How will you learn?”), but by asking her
to read it through, they got the right answers anyway.
Harry felt restless. He wanted Quidditch Through the
Ages back, to take his mind off his nerves about
tomorrow. Why should he be afraid of Snape? Getting
up, he told Ron and Hermione he was going to ask
Snape if he could have it.
“Better you than me,” they said together, but Harry
had an idea that Snape wouldn’t refuse if there were
other teachers listening.
He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked.
There was no answer. He knocked again. Nothing.
Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It was
worth a try. He pushed the door ajar and peered
inside — and a horrible scene met his eyes.
Snape and Filch were inside, alone. Snape was
holding his robes above his knees. One of his legs was
bloody and mangled. Filch was handing Snape
bandages.

“Blasted thing,” Snape was saying. “How are you
supposed to keep your eyes on all three heads at
once?”
Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but —
“POTTER!”
Snape ’s face was twisted with fury as he dropped his
robes quickly to hide his leg. Harry gulped.
“I just wondered if I could have my book back.”
“GET OUT! OUT!”
Harry left, before Snape could take any more points
from Gryffindor. He sprinted back upstairs.
“Did you get it?” Ron asked as Harry joined them.
“What’s the matter?”
In a low whisper, Harry told them what he’d seen.
“You know what this means?” he finished
breathlessly. “He tried to get past that three-headed
dog at Halloween! That’s where he was going when we
saw him — he’s after whatever it’s guarding! And I’d
bet my broomstick he let that troll in, to make a
diversion!”
Hermione’s eyes were wide.
“No — he wouldn’t,” she said. “I know he’s not very
nice, but he wouldn’t try and steal something
Dumbledore was keeping safe.”
“Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saints
or something,” snapped Ron. “I’m with Harry. I

wouldn’t put anything past Snape. But what’s he
after? What’s that dog guarding?”
Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the
same question. Neville was snoring loudly, but Harry
couldn’t sleep. He tried to empty his mind — he
needed to sleep, he had to, he had his first Quidditch
match in a few hours — but the expression on
Snape’s face when Harry had seen his leg wasn’t easy
to forget.
The next morning dawned very bright and cold. The
Great Hall was full of the delicious smell of fried
sausages and the cheerful chatter of everyone looking
forward to a good Quidditch match.
“You’ve got to eat some breakfast.”
“I don’t want anything.”
“Just a bit of toast,” wheedled Hermione.
“I’m not hungry.”
Harry felt terrible. In an hour’s time he’d be walking
onto the field.
“Harry, you need your strength,” said Seamus
Finnigan. “Seekers are always the ones who get
clobbered by the other team.”
“Thanks, Seamus,” said Harry, watching Seamus pile
ketchup on his sausages.
By eleven o’clock the whole school seemed to be out
in the stands around the Quidditch pitch. Many
students had binoculars. The seats might be raised
high in the air, but it was still difficult to see what
was going on sometimes.

Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus, and Dean
the West Ham fan up in the top row. As a surprise for
Harry, they had painted a large banner on one of the
sheets Scabbers had ruined. It said Potter for
President, and Dean, who was good at drawing, had
done a large Gryffindor lion underneath. Then
Hermione had performed a tricky little charm so that
the paint flashed different colors.
Meanwhile, in the locker room, Harry and the rest of
the team were changing into their scarlet Quidditch
robes (Slytherin would be playing in green) .
Wood cleared his throat for silence.
“Okay, men,” he said.
“And women,” said Chaser Angelina Johnson.
“And women,” Wood agreed. “This is it.”
“The big one,” said Fred Weasley.
“The one we’ve all been waiting for,” said George.
“We know Oliver’s speech by heart,” Fred told Harry,
“we were on the team last year.”
“Shut up, you two,” said Wood. “This is the best team
Gryffindor’s had in years. We’re going to win. I know
it.”
He glared at them all as if to say, “Or else.”
“Right. It’s time. Good luck, all of you.”
Harry followed Fred and George out of the locker
room and, hoping his knees weren’t going to give way,
walked onto the field to loud cheers.

Madam Hooch was refereeing. She stood in the
middle of the field waiting for the two teams, her
broom in her hand.
“Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you,” she said,
once they were all gathered around her. Harry noticed
that she seemed to be speaking particularly to the
Slytherin Captain, Marcus Flint, a fifth year. Harry
thought Flint looked as if he had some troll blood in
him. Out of the corner of his eye he saw the fluttering
banner high above, flashing Potter for President over
the crowd. His heart skipped. He felt braver.
“Mount your brooms, please.”
Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand.
Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.
Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. They
were off.
“And the Quaffle is taken immediately by Angelina
Johnson of Gryffindor — what an excellent Chaser
that girl is, and rather attractive, too — ”
“JORDAN!”
“Sorry, Professor.”
The Weasley twins’ friend, Lee Jordan, was doing the
commentary for the match, closely watched by
Professor McGonagall.
“And she’s really belting along up there, a neat pass
to Alicia Spinnet, a good find of Oliver Wood’s, last
year only a reserve — back to Johnson and — no, the
Slytherins have taken the Quaffle, Slytherin Captain
Marcus Flint gains the Quaffle and off he goes — Flint

flying like an eagle up there — he’s going to sc- no,
stopped by an excellent move by Gryffindor Keeper
Wood and the Gryffindors take the Quaffle — that’s
Chaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there, nice dive
around Flint, off up the field and — OUCH — that
must have hurt, hit in the back of the head by a
Bludger — Quaffle taken by the Slytherins — that’s
Adrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal posts, but
he’s blocked by a second Bludger — sent his way by
Fred or George Weasley, can’t tell which — nice play
by the Gryffindor Beater, anyway, and Johnson back
in possession of the Quaffle, a clear field ahead and
off she goes — she’s really flying — dodges a speeding
Bludger — the goal posts are ahead — come on, now,
Angelina — Keeper Bletchley dives — misses —
GRYFFINDORS SCORE!”
Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and
moans from the Slytherins.
“Budge up there, move along.”
“Hagrid!”
Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid
enough space to join them.
“Bin watchin’ from me hut,” said Hagrid, patting a
large pair of binoculars around his neck, “But it isn’t
the same as bein’ in the crowd. No sign of the Snitch
yet, eh?”
“Nope,” said Ron. “Harry hasn’t had much to do yet.”
“Kept outta trouble, though, that’s somethin’,” said
Hagrid, raising his binoculars and peering skyward at
the speck that was Harry.

Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game,
squinting about for some sign of the Snitch. This was
part of his and Wood’s game plan.
“Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the
Snitch,” Wood had said. “We don’t want you attacked
before you have to be.”
When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a couple
of loop-the-loops to let off his feelings. Now he was
back to staring around for the Snitch. Once he caught
sight of a flash of gold, but it was just a reflection
from one of the Weasleys’ wristwatches, and once a
Bludger decided to come pelting his way, more like a
cannonball than anything, but Harry dodged it and
Fred Weasley came chasing after it.
“All right there, Harry?” he had time to yell, as he
beat the Bludger furiously toward Marcus Flint.
“Slytherin in possession,” Lee Jordan was saying,
“Chaser Pucey ducks two Bludgers, two Weasleys,
and Chaser Bell, and speeds toward the — wait a
moment — was that the Snitch?”
A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Pucey
dropped the Quaffle, too busy looking over his
shoulder at the flash of gold that had passed his left
ear.
Harry saw it. In a great rush of excitement he dived
downward after the streak of gold. Slytherin Seeker
Terence Higgs had seen it, too. Neck and neck they
hurtled toward the Snitch — all the Chasers seemed
to have forgotten what they were supposed to be
doing as they hung in midair to watch.

Harry was faster than Higgs — he could see the little
round ball, wings fluttering, darting up ahead — he
put on an extra spurt of speed —
WHAM! A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindors
below — Marcus Flint had blocked Harry on purpose,
and Harry’s broom spun off course, Harry holding on
for dear life.
“Foul!” screamed the Gryffindors.
Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered
a free shot at the goal posts for Gryffindor. But in all
the confusion, of course, the Golden Snitch had
disappeared from sight again.
Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, “Send
him off, ref! Red card!”
“What are you talking about, Dean?” said Ron.
“Red card!” said Dean furiously. “In soccer you get
shown the red card and you’re out of the game!”
“But this isn’t soccer, Dean,” Ron reminded him.
Hagrid, however, was on Dean’s side.
“They oughta change the rules. Flint coulda knocked
Harry outta the air.”
Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.
“So — after that obvious and disgusting bit of
cheating — ”
“Jordan!” growled Professor McGonagall.
“I mean, after that open and revolting foul — ”

“Jordan, I’m warning you — ”
“All right, all right. Flint nearly kills the Gryffindor
Seeker, which could happen to anyone, I’m sure, so a
penalty to Gryffindor, taken by Spinnet, who puts it
away, no trouble, and we continue play, Gryffindor
still in possession.”
It was as Harry dodged another Bludger, which went
spinning dangerously past his head, that it happened.
His broom gave a sudden, frightening lurch. For a
split second, he thought he was going to fall. He
gripped the broom tightly with both his hands and
knees. He’d never felt anything like that.
It happened again. It was as though the broom was
trying to buck him off. But Nimbus Two Thousands
did not suddenly decide to buck their riders off. Harry
tried to turn back toward the Gryffindor goal posts —
he had half a mind to ask Wood to call time-out —
and then he realized that his broom was completely
out of his control. He couldn’t turn it. He couldn’t
direct it at all. It was zigzagging through the air, and
every now and then making violent swishing
movements that almost unseated him.
Lee was still commentating.
“Slytherin in possession — Flint with the Quaffle —
passes Spinnet — passes Bell — hit hard in the face
by a Bludger, hope it broke his nose — only joking,
Professor — Slytherins score — oh no ...”
The Slytherins were cheering. No one seemed to have
noticed that Harry’s broom was behaving strangely It
was carrying him slowly higher, away from the game,
jerking and twitching as it went.

“Dunno what Harry thinks he’s doing,” Hagrid
mumbled. He stared through his binoculars. “If I
didn’ know better, I’d say he’d lost control of his
broom ... but he can’t have. ...”
Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all over
the stands. His broom had started to roll over and
over, with him only just managing to hold on. Then
the whole crowd gasped. Harry’s broom had given a
wild jerk and Harry swung off it. He was now dangling
from it, holding on with only one hand.
“Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him?”
Seamus whispered.
“Can’t have,” Hagrid said, his voice shaking. “Can’t
nothing interfere with a broomstick except powerful
Dark magic — no kid could do that to a Nimbus Two
Thousand.”
At these words, Hermione seized Hagrid ’s binoculars,
but instead of looking up at Harry, she started
looking frantically at the crowd.
“What are you doing?” moaned Ron, gray-faced.
“I knew it,” Hermione gasped, “Snape — look.”
Ron grabbed the binoculars. Snape was in the middle
of the stands opposite them. He had his eyes fixed on
Harry and was muttering nonstop under his breath.
“He’s doing something — jinxing the broom,” said
Hermione.
“What should we do?”
“Leave it to me.”

Before Ron could say another word, Hermione had
disappeared. Ron turned the binoculars back on
Harry. His broom was vibrating so hard, it was almost
impossible for him to hang on much longer. The
whole crowd was on its feet, watching, terrified, as the
Weasleys flew up to try and pull Harry safely onto one
of their brooms, but it was no good — every time they
got near him, the broom would jump higher still. They
dropped lower and circled beneath him, obviously
hoping to catch him if he fell. Marcus Flint seized the
Quaffle and scored five times without anyone
noticing.
“Come on, Hermione,” Ron muttered desperately.
Hermione had fought her way across to the stand
where Snape stood, and was now racing along the row
behind him; she didn’t even stop to say sorry as she
knocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into the row in
front. Reaching Snape, she crouched down, pulled
out her wand, and whispered a few, well-chosen
words. Bright blue flames shot from her wand onto
the hem of Snape ’s robes.
It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize
that he was on fire. A sudden yelp told her she had
done her job. Scooping the fire off him into a little jar
in her pocket, she scrambled back along the row —
Snape would never know what had happened.
It was enough. Up in the air, Harry was suddenly able
to clamber back on to his broom.
“Neville, you can look!” Ron said. Neville had been
sobbing into Hagrid’s jacket for the last five minutes.
Harry was speeding toward the ground when the
crowd saw him clap his hand to his mouth as though

he was about to be sick — he hit the field on all fours
— coughed — and something gold fell into his hand.
“I’ve got the Snitch!” he shouted, waving it above his
head, and the game ended in complete confusion.
“He didn’t catch it, he nearly swallowed it,” Flint was
still howling twenty minutes later, but it made no
difference — Harry hadn’t broken any rules and Lee
Jordan was still happily shouting the results —
Gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventy
points to sixty. Harry heard none of this, though. He
was being made a cup of strong tea back in Hagrid’s
hut, with Ron and Hermione.
“It was Snape,” Ron was explaining, “Hermione and I
saw him. He was cursing your broomstick, muttering,
he wouldn’t take his eyes off you.”
“Rubbish,” said Hagrid, who hadn’t heard a word of
what had gone on next to him in the stands. “Why
would Snape do somethin’ like that?”
Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another,
wondering what to tell him. Harry decided on the
truth.
“I found out something about him,” he told Hagrid.
“He tried to get past that three-headed dog on
Halloween. It bit him. We think he was trying to steal
whatever it’s guarding.”
Hagrid dropped the teapot.
“How do you know about Fluffy?” he said.
“ Fluffy ?”

“Yeah — he’s mine — bought him off a Greek chappie
I met in the pub las’ year — I lent him to Dumbledore
to guard the — ”
“Yes?” said Harry eagerly.
“Now, don’t ask me anymore,” said Hagrid gruffly.
“That’s top secret, that is.”
“But Snape’s trying to steal it.”
“Rubbish,” said Hagrid again. “Snape’s a Hogwarts
teacher, he’d do nothin’ of the sort.”
“So why did he just try and kill Harry?” cried
Hermione.
The afternoon’s events certainly seemed to have
changed her mind about Snape.
“I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid, I’ve read all
about them! You’ve got to keep eye contact, and
Snape wasn’t blinking at all, I saw him!”
“I’m tellin’ yeh, yer wrong!” said Hagrid hotly. “I don’
know why Harry’s broom acted like that, but Snape
wouldn’ try an’ kill a student! Now, listen to me, all
three of yeh — yer meddlin’ in things that don’
concern yeh. It’s dangerous. You forget that dog, an’
you forget what it’s guardin’, that’s between Professor
Dumbledore an’ Nicolas Flamel — ■”
“Aha!” said Harry, “so there’s someone called Nicolas
Flamel involved, is there?”
Hagrid looked furious with himself.

THE MIRROR OF ERISED
Christmas was coming. One morning in mid-
December, Hogwarts woke to find itself covered in
several feet of snow. The lake froze solid and the
Weasley twins were punished for bewitching several
snowballs so that they followed Quirrell around,
bouncing off the back of his turban. The few owls that
managed to battle their way through the stormy sky
to deliver mail had to be nursed back to health by
Hagrid before they could fly off again.
No one could wait for the holidays to start. While the
Gryffindor common room and the Great Hall had
roaring fires, the drafty corridors had become icy and
a bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms.
Worst of all were Professor Snape’s classes down in
the dungeons, where their breath rose in a mist
before them and they kept as close as possible to
their hot cauldrons.
“I do feel so sorry,” said Draco Malfoy, one Potions
class, “for all those people who have to stay at

Hogwarts for Christmas because they’re not wanted
at home.”
He was looking over at Harry as he spoke. Crabbe and
Goyle chuckled. Harry, who was measuring out
powdered spine of lion-fish, ignored them. Malfoy had
been even more unpleasant than usual since the
Quidditch match. Disgusted that the Slytherins had
lost, he had tried to get everyone laughing at how a
wide-mouthed tree frog would be replacing Harry as
Seeker next. Then he’d realized that nobody found
this funny, because they were all so impressed at the
way Harry had managed to stay on his bucking
broomstick. So Malfoy, jealous and angry, had gone
back to taunting Harry about having no proper
family.
It was true that Harry wasn’t going back to Privet
Drive for Christmas. Professor McGonagall had come
around the week before, making a list of students
who would be staying for the holidays, and Harry had
signed up at once. He didn’t feel sorry for himself at
all; this would probably be the best Christmas he’d
ever had. Ron and his brothers were staying, too,
because Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were going to Romania
to visit Charlie.
When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions,
they found a large fir tree blocking the corridor ahead.
Two enormous feet sticking out at the bottom and a
loud puffing sound told them that Hagrid was behind
it.
“Hi, Hagrid, want any help?” Ron asked, sticking his
head through the branches.
“Nah, I’m all right, thanks, Ron.”

“Would you mind moving out of the way?” came
Malfoy’s cold drawl from behind them. “Are you trying
to earn some extra money, Weasley? Hoping to be
gamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts, I
suppose — that hut of Hagrid’s must seem like a
palace compared to what your family’s used to.”
Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs.
“WEASLEY!”
Ron let go of the front of Malfoy’s robes.
“He was provoked, Professor Snape,” said Hagrid,
sticking his huge hairy face out from behind the tree.
“Malfoy was insultin’ his family.”
“Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules,
Hagrid,” said Snape silkily. “Five points from
Gryffindor, Weasley, and be grateful it isn’t more.
Move along, all of you.”
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle pushed roughly past the
tree, scattering needles everywhere and smirking.
“I’ll get him,” said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoy’s
back, “one of these days, I’ll get him — ”
“I hate them both,” said Harry, “Malfoy and Snape.”
“Come on, cheer up, it’s nearly Christmas,” said
Hagrid. “Tell yeh what, come with me an’ see the
Great Hall, looks a treat.”
So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree off
to the Great Hall, where Professor McGonagall and
Professor Flitwick were busy with the Christmas
decorations.

“Ah, Hagrid, the last tree — put it in the far corner,
would you?”
The hall looked spectacular. Festoons of holly and
mistletoe hung all around the walls, and no less than
twelve towering Christmas trees stood around the
room, some sparkling with tiny icicles, some glittering
with hundreds of candles.
“How many days you got left until yer holidays?”
Hagrid asked.
“Just one,” said Hermione. “And that reminds me —
Harry, Ron, we’ve got half an hour before lunch, we
should be in the library.”
“Oh yeah, you’re right,” said Ron, tearing his eyes
away from Professor Flitwick, who had golden
bubbles blossoming out of his wand and was trailing
them over the branches of the new tree.
“The library?” said Hagrid, following them out of the
hall. “Just before the holidays? Bit keen, aren’t yeh?”
“Oh, we’re not working,” Harry told him brightly.
“Ever since you mentioned Nicolas Flamel we’ve been
trying to find out who he is.”
“You what?” Hagrid looked shocked. “Listen here —
I’ve told yeh — drop it. It’s nothin’ to you what that
dog’s guardin’.”
“We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, that’s
all,” said Hermione.
“Unless you’d like to tell us and save us the trouble?”
Harry added. “We must’ve been through hundreds of
books already and we can’t find him anywhere — just

give us a hint — I know I’ve read his name
somewhere.”
“I’m sayin’ nothin’,” said Hagrid flatly.
“Just have to find out for ourselves, then,” said Ron,
and they left Hagrid looking disgruntled and hurried
off to the library.
They had indeed been searching books for Flamel’s
name ever since Hagrid had let it slip, because how
else were they going to find out what Snape was
trying to steal? The trouble was, it was very hard to
know where to begin, not knowing what Flamel might
have done to get himself into a book. He wasn’t in
Great Wizards of the Twentieth Century, or Notable
Magical Names of Our Time ; he was missing, too, from
Important Modern Magical Discoveries, and A Study of
Recent Developments in Wizardry. And then, of
course, there was the sheer size of the library; tens of
thousands of books; thousands of shelves; hundreds
of narrow rows.
Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had
decided to search while Ron strode off down a row of
books and started pulling them off the shelves at
random. Harry wandered over to the Restricted
Section. He had been wondering for a while if Flamel
wasn’t somewhere in there. Unfortunately, you
needed a specially signed note from one of the
teachers to look in any of the restricted books, and he
knew he’d never get one. These were the books
containing powerful Dark Magic never taught at
Hogwarts, and only read by older students studying
advanced Defense Against the Dark Arts.
“What are you looking for, boy?”
“Nothing,” said Harry.

Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather
duster at him.
“You’d better get out, then. Go on — out!”
Wishing he’d been a bit quicker at thinking up some
story, Harry left the library. He, Ron, and Hermione
had already agreed they’d better not ask Madam
Pince where they could find Flamel. They were sure
she’d be able to tell them, but they couldn’t risk
Snape hearing what they were up to.
Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other
two had found anything, but he wasn’t very hopeful.
They had been looking for two weeks, after all, but as
they only had odd moments between lessons it wasn’t
surprising they’d found nothing. What they really
needed was a nice long search without Madam Pince
breathing down their necks.
Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him,
shaking their heads. They went off to lunch.
“You will keep looking while I’m away, won’t you?”
said Hermione. “And send me an owl if you find
anything.”
“And you could ask your parents if they know who
Flamel is,” said Ron. “It’d be safe to ask them.”
“Very safe, as they’re both dentists,” said Hermione.
Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry were
having too good a time to think much about Flamel.
They had the dormitory to themselves and the
common room was far emptier than usual, so they
were able to get the good armchairs by the fire. They
sat by the hour eating anything they could spear on a
toasting fork — bread, English muffins,

marshmallows — and plotting ways of getting Malfoy
expelled, which were fun to talk about even if they
wouldn’t work.
Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess. This
was exactly like Muggle chess except that the figures
were alive, which made it a lot like directing troops in
battle. Ron’s set was very old and battered. Like
everything else he owned, it had once belonged to
someone else in his family — in this case, his
grandfather. However, old chessmen weren’t a
drawback at all. Ron knew them so well he never had
trouble getting them to do what he wanted.
Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had
lent him, and they didn’t trust him at all. He wasn’t a
very good player yet and they kept shouting different
bits of advice at him, which was confusing. “Don’t
send me there, can’t you see his knight? Send him, we
can afford to lose him.”
On Christmas Eve, Harry went to bed looking forward
to the next day for the food and the fun, but not
expecting any presents at all. When he woke early in
the morning, however, the first thing he saw was a
small pile of packages at the foot of his bed.
“Merry Christmas,” said Ron sleepily as Harry
scrambled out of bed and pulled on his bathrobe.
“You, too,” said Harry. “Will you look at this? I’ve got
some presents!”
“What did you expect, turnips?” said Ron, turning to
his own pile, which was a lot bigger than Harry’s.
Harry picked up the top parcel. It was wrapped in
thick brown paper and scrawled across it was To
Harry, from Hagrid. Inside was a roughly cut wooden

flute. Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself. Harry
blew it — it sounded a bit like an owl.
A second, very small parcel contained a note.
We received your message and enclose your Christmas
present. From Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia. Taped
to the note was a fifty-pence piece.
“That’s friendly,” said Harry.
Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence.
“ Weird\ ” he said, “What a shape! This is money?”
“You can keep it,” said Harry, laughing at how
pleased Ron was. “Hagrid and my aunt and uncle —
so who sent these?”
“I think I know who that one’s from,” said Ron,
turning a bit pink and pointing to a very lumpy
parcel. “My mom. I told her you didn’t expect any
presents and — oh, no,” he groaned, “she’s made you
a Weasley sweater.”
Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-
knitted sweater in emerald green and a large box of
homemade fudge.
“Every year she makes us a sweater,” said Ron,
unwrapping his own, “and mine’s always maroon.”
“That’s really nice of her,” said Harry, trying the
fudge, which was very tasty.
His next present also contained candy — a large box
of Chocolate Frogs from Hermione.

This only left one parcel. Harry picked it up and felt
it. It was very light. He unwrapped it.
Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the
floor where it lay in gleaming folds. Ron gasped.
“I’ve heard of those,” he said in a hushed voice,
dropping the box of Every Flavor Beans he’d gotten
from Hermione. “If that’s what I think it is — they’re
really rare, and really valuable.”
“What is it?”
Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. It
was strange to the touch, like water woven into
material.
“It’s an Invisibility Cloak,” said Ron, a look of awe on
his face. “I’m sure it is — try it on.”
Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Ron
gave a yell.
“It is! Look down!”
Harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. He
dashed to the mirror. Sure enough, his reflection
looked back at him, just his head suspended in
midair, his body completely invisible. He pulled the
cloak over his head and his reflection vanished
completely.
“There’s a note!” said Ron suddenly. “A note fell out of
it!”
Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter.
Written in narrow, loopy writing he had never seen
before were the following words:

Your father left this in my possession before he died. It
is time it was returned to you.
Use it well.
A Very Merry Christmas to you.
There was no signature. Harry stared at the note. Ron
was admiring the cloak.
“I’d give anuthinq for one of these,” he said. “Anuthinq.
What’s the matter?”
“Nothing,” said Harry. He felt very strange. Who had
sent the cloak? Had it really once belonged to his
father?
Before he could say or think anything else, the
dormitory door was flung open and Fred and George
Weasley bounded in. Harry stuffed the cloak quickly
out of sight. He didn’t feel like sharing it with anyone
else yet.
“Merry Christmas!”
“Hey, look — Harry’s got a Weasley sweater, too!”
Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters, one
with a large yellow F on it, the other a G.
“Harry’s is better than ours, though,” said Fred,
holding up Harry’s sweater. “She obviously makes
more of an effort if you’re not family.”
“Why aren’t you wearing yours, Ron?” George
demanded. “Come on, get it on, they’re lovely and
warm.”

“I hate maroon,” Ron moaned halfheartedly as he
pulled it over his head.
“You haven’t got a letter on yours,” George observed.
“I suppose she thinks you don’t forget your name. But
we’re not stupid — we know we’re called Gred and
Forge.”
“What’s all this noise?”
Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door,
looking disapproving. He had clearly gotten halfway
through unwrapping his presents as he, too, carried a
lumpy sweater over his arm, which Fred seized.
“P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, we’re all
wearing ours, even Harry got one.”
“I — don’t — want — ” said Percy thickly, as the twins
forced the sweater over his head, knocking his glasses
askew.
“And you’re not sitting with the prefects today,
either,” said George. “Christmas is a time for family.”
They frog-marched Percy from the room, his arms
pinned to his side by his sweater.
Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas
dinner. A hundred fat, roast turkeys; mountains of
roast and boiled potatoes; platters of chipolatas;
tureens of buttered peas, silver boats of thick, rich
gravy and cranberry sauce — and stacks of wizard
crackers every few feet along the table. These
fantastic party favors were nothing like the feeble
Muggle ones the Dursleys usually bought, with their
little plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside.
Harry pulled a wizard cracker with Fred and it didn’t
just bang, it went off with a blast like a cannon and

engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke, while from
the inside exploded a rear admiral’s hat and several
live, white mice. Up at the High Table, Dumbledore
had swapped his pointed wizard’s hat for a flowered
bonnet, and was chuckling merrily at a joke Professor
Flitwick had just read him.
Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey.
Percy nearly broke his teeth on a silver Sickle
embedded in his slice. Harry watched Hagrid getting
redder and redder in the face as he called for more
wine, finally kissing Professor McGonagall on the
cheek, who, to Harry’s amazement, giggled and
blushed, her top hat lopsided.
When Harry finally left the table, he was laden down
with a stack of things out of the crackers, including a
pack of non-explodable, luminous balloons, a Grow-
Your-Own-Warts kit, and his own new wizard chess
set. The white mice had disappeared and Harry had a
nasty feeling they were going to end up as Mrs.
Norris’s Christmas dinner.
Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon
having a furious snowball fight on the grounds. Then,
cold, wet, and gasping for breath, they returned to the
fire in the Gryffindor common room, where Harry
broke in his new chess set by losing spectacularly to
Ron. He suspected he wouldn’t have lost so badly if
Percy hadn’t tried to help him so much.
After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle,
and Christmas cake, everyone felt too full and sleepy
to do much before bed except sit and watch Percy
chase Fred and George all over Gryffindor Tower
because they’d stolen his prefect badge.
It had been Harry’s best Christmas day ever. Yet
something had been nagging at the back of his mind

all day. Not until he climbed into bed was he free to
think about it: the Invisibility Cloak and whoever had
sent it.
Ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothing
mysterious to bother him, fell asleep almost as soon
as he’d drawn the curtains of his four-poster. Harry
leaned over the side of his own bed and pulled the
cloak out from under it.
His father’s ... this had been his father’s. He let the
material flow over his hands, smoother than silk, light
as air. Use it well, the note had said.
He had to try it, now. He slipped out of bed and
wrapped the cloak around himself. Looking down at
his legs, he saw only moonlight and shadows. It was a
very funny feeling.
Use it well.
Suddenly, Harry felt wide-awake. The whole of
Hogwarts was open to him in this cloak. Excitement
flooded through him as he stood there in the dark
and silence. He could go anywhere in this, anywhere,
and Filch would never know.
Ron grunted in his sleep. Should Harry wake him?
Something held him back — his father’s cloak — he
felt that this time — the first time — he wanted to use
it alone.
He crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, across
the common room, and climbed through the portrait
hole.
“Who’s there?” squawked the Fat Lady. Harry said
nothing. He walked quickly down the corridor.

Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing,
and thought. And then it came to him. The Restricted
Section in the library. He’d be able to read as long as
he liked, as long as it took to find out who Flamel
was. He set off, drawing the Invisibility Cloak tight
around him as he walked.
The library was pitch-black and very eerie. Harry lit a
lamp to see his way along the rows of books. The
lamp looked as if it was floating along in midair, and
even though Harry could feel his arm supporting it,
the sight gave him the creeps.
The Restricted Section was right at the back of the
library. Stepping carefully over the rope that
separated these books from the rest of the library, he
held up his lamp to read the titles.
They didn’t tell him much. Their peeling, faded gold
letters spelled words in languages Harry couldn’t
understand. Some had no title at all. One book had a
dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood. The
hairs on the back of Harry’s neck prickled. Maybe he
was imagining it, maybe not, but he thought a faint
whispering was coming from the books, as though
they knew someone was there who shouldn’t be.
He had to start somewhere. Setting the lamp down
carefully on the floor, he looked along the bottom
shelf for an interesting-looking book. A large black
and silver volume caught his eye. He pulled it out
with difficulty, because it was very heavy, and,
balancing it on his knee, let it fall open.
A piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence —
the book was screaming! Harry snapped it shut, but
the shriek went on and on, one high, unbroken,
earsplitting note. He stumbled backward and knocked
over his lamp, which went out at once. Panicking, he

heard footsteps coming down the corridor outside —
stuffing the shrieking book back on the shelf, he ran
for it. He passed Filch in the doorway; Filch’s pale,
wild eyes looked straight through him, and Harry
slipped under Filch’s outstretched arm and streaked
off up the corridor, the book’s shrieks still ringing in
his ears.
He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of
armor. He had been so busy getting away from the
library, he hadn’t paid attention to where he was
going. Perhaps because it was dark, he didn’t
recognize where he was at all. There was a suit of
armor near the kitchens, he knew, but he must be
five floors above there.
“You asked me to come directly to you, Professor, if
anyone was wandering around at night, and
somebody’s been in the library — Restricted Section.”
Harry felt the blood drain out of his face. Wherever he
was, Filch must know a shortcut, because his soft,
greasy voice was getting nearer, and to his horror, it
was Snape who replied, “The Restricted Section? Well,
they can’t be far, we’ll catch them.”
Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape
came around the corner ahead. They couldn’t see
him, of course, but it was a narrow corridor and if
they came much nearer they’d knock right into him —
the cloak didn’t stop him from being solid.
He backed away as quietly as he could. A door stood
ajar to his left. It was his only hope. He squeezed
through it, holding his breath, trying not to move it,
and to his relief he managed to get inside the room
without their noticing anything. They walked straight
past, and Harry leaned against the wall, breathing
deeply, listening to their footsteps dying away. That

had been close, very close. It was a few seconds
before he noticed anything about the room he had
hidden in.
It looked like an unused classroom. The dark shapes
of desks and chairs were piled against the walls, and
there was an upturned wastepaper basket — but
propped against the wall facing him was something
that didn’t look as if it belonged there, something that
looked as if someone had just put it there to keep it
out of the way.
It was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling,
with an ornate gold frame, standing on two clawed
feet. There was an inscription carved around the top:
Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi.
His panic fading now that there was no sound of Filch
and Snape, Harry moved nearer to the mirror,
wanting to look at himself but see no reflection again.
He stepped in front of it.
He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself
from screaming. He whirled around. His heart was
pounding far more furiously than when the book had
screamed — for he had seen not only himself in the
mirror, but a whole crowd of people standing right
behind him.
But the room was empty. Breathing very fast, he
turned slowly back to the mirror.
There he was, reflected in it, white and scared-
looking, and there, reflected behind him, were at least
ten others. Harry looked over his shoulder — but still,
no one was there. Or were they all invisible, too? Was
he in fact in a room full of invisible people and this
mirrors trick was that it reflected them, invisible or
not?

He looked in the mirror again. A woman standing
right behind his reflection was smiling at him and
waving. He reached out a hand and felt the air behind
him. If she was really there, he’d touch her, their
reflections were so close together, but he felt only air
— she and the others existed only in the mirror.
She was a very pretty woman. She had dark red hair
and her eyes — her eyes are just like mine, Harry
thought, edging a little closer to the glass. Bright
green — exactly the same shape, but then he noticed
that she was crying; smiling, but crying at the same
time. The tall, thin, black-haired man standing next
to her put his arm around her. He wore glasses, and
his hair was very untidy. It stuck up at the back, just
as Harry’s did.
Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose
was nearly touching that of his reflection.
“Mom?” he whispered. “Dad?”
They just looked at him, smiling. And slowly, Harry
looked into the faces of the other people in the mirror,
and saw other pairs of green eyes like his, other noses
like his, even a little old man who looked as though
he had Harry’s knobbly knees — Harry was looking at
his family, for the first time in his life.
The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he stared
hungrily back at them, his hands pressed flat against
the glass as though he was hoping to fall right
through it and reach them. He had a powerful kind of
ache inside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.
How long he stood there, he didn’t know. The
reflections did not fade and he looked and looked
until a distant noise brought him back to his senses.
He couldn’t stay here, he had to find his way back to

bed. He tore his eyes away from his mother’s face,
whispered, “I’ll come back,” and hurried from the
room.
“You could have woken me up,” said Ron, crossly.
“You can come tonight, I’m going back, I want to show
you the mirror.”
“I’d like to see your mom and dad,” Ron said eagerly.
“And I want to see all your family, all the Weasleys,
you’ll be able to show me your other brothers and
everyone.”
“You can see them any old time,” said Ron. “Just
come round my house this summer. Anyway, maybe
it only shows dead people. Shame about not finding
Flamel, though. Have some bacon or something, why
aren’t you eating anything?”
Harry couldn’t eat. He had seen his parents and
would be seeing them again tonight. He had almost
forgotten about Flamel. It didn’t seem very important
anymore. Who cared what the three-headed dog was
guarding? What did it matter if Snape stole it, really?
“Are you all right?” said Ron. “You look odd.”
What Harry feared most was that he might not be
able to find the mirror room again. With Ron covered
in the cloak, too, they had to walk much more slowly
the next night. They tried retracing Harry’s route from
the library, wandering around the dark passageways
for nearly an hour.
“I’m freezing,” said Ron. “Let’s forget it and go back.”
“IVo!” Harry hissed. “I know it’s here somewhere.”

They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the
opposite direction, but saw no one else. Just as Ron
started moaning that his feet were dead with cold,
Harry spotted the suit of armor.
“It’s here — just here — yes!”
They pushed the door open. Harry dropped the cloak
from around his shoulders and ran to the mirror.
There they were. His mother and father beamed at the
sight of him.
“See?” Harry whispered.
“I can’t see anything.”
“Look! Look at them all ... there are loads of them. ...”
“I can only see you.”
“Look in it properly, go on, stand where I am.”
Harry stepped aside, but with Ron in front of the
mirror, he couldn’t see his family anymore, just Ron
in his paisley pajamas.
Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.
“Look at me!” he said.
“Can you see all your family standing around you?”
“No — I’m alone — but I’m different — I look older —
and I’m Head Boy!”
“What?”

“I am — I’m wearing the badge like Bill used to — and
I’m holding the House Cup and the Quidditch Cup —
I’m Quidditch captain, too!”
Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to
look excitedly at Harry.
“Do you think this mirror shows the future?”
“How can it? All my family are dead — let me have
another look — ”
“You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit
more time.”
“You’re only holding the Quidditch Cup, what’s
interesting about that? I want to see my parents.”
“Don’t push me — ”
A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to
their discussion. They hadn’t realized how loudly they
had been talking.
“Quick!”
Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous
eyes of Mrs. Norris came round the door. Ron and
Harry stood quite still, both thinking the same thing
— did the cloak work on cats? After what seemed an
age, she turned and left.
“This isn’t safe — she might have gone for Filch, I bet
she heard us. Come on.”
And Ron pulled Harry out of the room.
The snow still hadn’t melted the next morning.

“Want to play chess, Harry?” said Ron.
“No.”
“Why don’t we go down and visit Hagrid?”
“No ... you go ...”
“I know what you’re thinking about, Harry, that
mirror. Don’t go back tonight.”
“Why not?”
“I dunno, I’ve just got a bad feeling about it — and
anyway, you’ve had too many close shaves already.
Filch, Snape, and Mrs. Norris are wandering around.
So what if they can’t see you? What if they walk into
you? What if you knock something over?”
“You sound like Hermione.”
“I’m serious, Harry, don’t go.”
But Harry only had one thought in his head, which
was to get back in front of the mirror, and Ron wasn’t
going to stop him.
That third night he found his way more quickly than
before. He was walking so fast he knew he was
making more noise than was wise, but he didn’t meet
anyone.
And there were his mother and father smiling at him
again, and one of his grandfathers nodding happily.
Harry sank down to sit on the floor in front of the
mirror. There was nothing to stop him from staying
here all night with his family. Nothing at all.
Except —

“So — back again, Harry?”
Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. He
looked behind him. Sitting on one of the desks by the
wall was none other than Albus Dumbledore. Harry
must have walked straight past him, so desperate to
get to the mirror he hadn’t noticed him.
“I — I didn’t see you, sir.”
“Strange how nearsighted being invisible can make
you,” said Dumbledore, and Harry was relieved to see
that he was smiling.
“So,” said Dumbledore, slipping off the desk to sit on
the floor with Harry, “you, like hundreds before you,
have discovered the delights of the Mirror of Erised.”
“I didn’t know it was called that, sir.”
“But I expect you’ve realized by now what it does?”
“It — well — it shows me my family — ”
“And it showed your friend Ron himself as Head Boy.”
“How did you know — ?”
“I don’t need a cloak to become invisible,” said
Dumbledore gently. “Now, can you think what the
Mirror of Erised shows us all?”
Harry shook his head.
“Let me explain. The happiest man on earth would be
able to use the Mirror of Erised like a normal mirror,
that is, he would look into it and see himself exactly
as he is. Does that help?”

Harry thought. Then he said slowly, “It shows us
what we want ... whatever we want ...”
“Yes and no,” said Dumbledore quietly. “It shows us
nothing more or less than the deepest, most
desperate desire of our hearts. You, who have never
known your family, see them standing around you.
Ronald Weasley, who has always been overshadowed
by his brothers, sees himself standing alone, the best
of all of them. However, this mirror will give us
neither knowledge or truth. Men have wasted away
before it, entranced by what they have seen, or been
driven mad, not knowing if what it shows is real or
even possible.
“The Mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow,
Harry, and I ask you not to go looking for it again. If
you ever do run across it, you will now be prepared. It
does not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live,
remember that. Now, why don’t you put that
admirable cloak back on and get off to bed?”
Harry stood up.
“Sir — Professor Dumbledore? Can I ask you
something?”
“Obviously, you’ve just done so,” Dumbledore smiled.
“You may ask me one more thing, however.”
“What do you see when you look in the mirror?”
“I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks.”
Harry stared.
“One can never have enough socks,” said
Dumbledore. “Another Christmas has come and gone

and I didn’t get a single pair. People will insist on
giving me books.”
It was only when he was back in bed that it struck
Harry that Dumbledore might not have been quite
truthful. But then, he thought, as he shoved
Scabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personal
question.

NICHOLAS FLAMBL
Dumbledore had convinced Harry not to go looking
for the Mirror of Erised again, and for the rest of the
Christmas holidays the Invisibility Cloak stayed
folded at the bottom of his trunk. Harry wished he
could forget what he’d seen in the mirror as easily,
but he couldn’t. He started having nightmares. Over
and over again he dreamed about his parents
disappearing in a flash of green light, while a high
voice cackled with laughter.
“You see, Dumbledore was right, that mirror could
drive you mad,” said Ron, when Harry told him about
these dreams.
Hermione, who came back the day before term
started, took a different view of things. She was torn
between horror at the idea of Harry being out of bed,
roaming the school three nights in a row (“If Filch had
caught you!”), and disappointment that he hadn’t at
least found out who Nicolas Flamel was.

They had almost given up hope of ever finding Flamel
in a library book, even though Harry was still sure
he’d read the name somewhere. Once term had
started, they were back to skimming through books
for ten minutes during their breaks. Harry had even
less time than the other two, because Quidditch
practice had started again.
Wood was working the team harder than ever. Even
the endless rain that had replaced the snow couldn’t
dampen his spirits. The Weasleys complained that
Wood was becoming a fanatic, but Harry was on
Wood’s side. If they won their next match, against
Hufflepuff, they would overtake Slytherin in the
House Championship for the first time in seven years.
Quite apart from wanting to win, Harry found that he
had fewer nightmares when he was tired out after
training.
Then, during one particularly wet and muddy practice
session, Wood gave the team a bit of bad news. He’d
just gotten very angry with the Weasleys, who kept
dive-bombing each other and pretending to fall off
their brooms.
“Will you stop messing around!” he yelled. “That’s
exactly the sort of thing that’ll lose us the match!
Snape’s refereeing this time, and he’ll be looking for
any excuse to knock points off Gryffindor!”
George Weasley really did fall off his broom at these
words.
“ Snape’s refereeing?” he spluttered through a
mouthful of mud. “When’s he ever refereed a
Quidditch match? He’s not going to be fair if we might
overtake Slytherin.”



By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closet
across the hall. Once they were safely stowed among
the buckets and mops, Harry yanked out a couple of
the bristles that covered Goyle ’s forehead and Ron
pulled out several of Crabbe ’s hairs. They also stole
their shoes, because their own were far too small for
Crabbe- and Goyle-size feet. Then, still stunned at
what they had just done, they sprinted up to Moaning
Myrtle’s bathroom.
They could hardly see for the thick black smoke
issuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirring
the cauldron. Pulling their robes up over their faces,
Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door.
“Hermione?”
They heard the scrape of the lock and Hermione
emerged, shiny-faced and looking anxious. Behind
her they heard the gloop gloop of the bubbling,
glutinous potion. Three glass tumblers stood ready on
the toilet seat.
“Did you get them?” Hermione asked breathlessly.

Harry showed her Goyle’s hair. “Good. And I sneaked these spare robes out of the
laundry,” Hermione said, holding up a small sack.
“You’ll need bigger sizes once you’re Crabbe and
Goyle.”
The three of them stared into the cauldron. Close up,
the potion looked like thick, dark mud, bubbling
sluggishly.
“I’m sure I’ve done everything right,” said Hermione,
nervously rereading the splotched page of Moste
Potente Potions. “It looks like the book says it should
... once we’ve drunk it, we’ll have exactly an hour
before we change back into ourselves.”
“Now what?” Ron whispered.
“We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs.”
Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into each
of the glasses. Then, her hand trembling, she shook
Millicent Bulstrode’s hair out of its bottle into the first
glass.
The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle and
frothed madly. A second later, it had turned a sick
sort of yellow.
“Urgh — essence of Millicent Bulstrode,” said Ron,
eyeing it with loathing. “Bet it tastes disgusting.”
“Add yours, then,” said Hermione.
Harry dropped Goyle’s hair into the middle glass and
Ron put Crabbe’s into the last one. Both glasses
hissed and frothed: Goyle’s turned the khaki color of
a booger, Crabbe’s a dark, murky brown.

“Hang on,” said Harry as Ron and Hermione reached
for their glasses. “We’d better not all drink them in
here. ... Once we turn into Crabbe and Goyle we won’t
fit. And Millicent Bulstrode’s no pixie.”
“Good thinking,” said Ron, unlocking the door. “We’ll
take separate stalls.”
Careful not to spill a drop of his Polyjuice Potion,
Harry slipped into the middle stall.
“Ready?” he called.
“Ready,” came Ron’s and Hermione’s voices.
“One — two — three — ”
Pinching his nose, Harry drank the potion down in
two large gulps. It tasted like overcooked cabbage.
Immediately, his insides started writhing as though
he’d just swallowed live snakes — doubled up, he
wondered whether he was going to be sick — then a
burning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach to
the very ends of his fingers and toes — next, bringing
him gasping to all fours, came a horrible melting
feeling, as the skin all over his body bubbled like hot
wax — and before his eyes, his hands began to grow,
the fingers thickened, the nails broadened, the
knuckles were bulging like bolts — his shoulders
stretched painfully and a prickling on his forehead
told him that hair was creeping down toward his
eyebrows — his robes ripped as his chest expanded
like a barrel bursting its hoops — his feet were agony
in shoes four sizes too small —
As suddenly as it had started, everything stopped.
Harry lay facedown on the stone-cold floor, listening
to Myrtle gurgling morosely in the end toilet. With

difficulty, he kicked off his shoes and stood up. So
this was what it felt like, being Goyle. His large hand
trembling, he pulled off his old robes, which were
hanging a foot above his ankles, pulled on the spare
ones, and laced up Goyle’s boatlike shoes. He reached
up to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only the
short growth of wiry bristles, low on his forehead.
Then he realized that his glasses were clouding his
eyes because Goyle obviously didn’t need them — he
took them off and called, “Are you two okay?” Goyle’s
low rasp of a voice issued from his mouth.
“Yeah,” came the deep grunt of Crabbe from his right.
Harry unlocked his door and stepped in front of the
cracked mirror. Goyle stared back at him out of dull,
deepset eyes. Harry scratched his ear. So did Goyle.
Ron’s door opened. They stared at each other. Except
that he looked pale and shocked, Ron was
indistinguishable from Crabbe, from the pudding-
bowl haircut to the long, gorilla arms.
“This is unbelievable,” said Ron, approaching the
mirror and prodding Crabbe ’s flat nose.
“Unbelievable.”
“We’d better get going,” said Harry, loosening the
watch that was cutting into Goyle’s thick wrist. “We’ve
still got to find out where the Slytherin common room
is. I only hope we can find someone to follow ...”
Ron, who had been gazing at Harry, said, “You don’t
know how bizarre it is to see Goyle thinking.” He
banged on Hermione’s door. “C’mon, we need to go — ”
A high-pitched voice answered him.
“I — I don’t think I’m going to come after all. You go
on without me.”
“Hermione, we know Millicent Bulstrode’s ugly, no
one’s going to know it’s you — ”
“No — really — I don’t think I’ll come. You two hurry
up, you’re wasting time — ”
Harry looked at Ron, bewildered.
“That looks more like Goyle,” said Ron. “That’s how he
looks every time a teacher asks him a question.”
“Hermione, are you okay?” said Harry through the
door.
“Fine — I’m fine — go on — ”
Harry looked at his watch. Five of their precious sixty
minutes had already passed.
“Well meet you back here, all right?” he said.
Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroom
carefully, checked that the coast was clear, and set
off.
“Don’t swing your arms like that,” Harry muttered to
Ron.
“Eh?”
“Crabbe holds them sort of stiff. ...”
“How’s this?”
“Yeah, that’s better. ...”
They went down the marble staircase. All they needed
now was a Slytherin that they could follow to the
Slytherin common room, but there was nobody
around.
“Any ideas?” muttered Harry.
“The Slytherins always come up to breakfast from
over there,” said Ron, nodding at the entrance to the
dungeons. The words had barely left his mouth when
a girl with long, curly hair emerged from the entrance.
“Excuse me,” said Ron, hurrying up to her. “We’ve
forgotten the way to our common room.”
“I beg your pardon?” said the girl stiffly. “Our common
room? I’m a Ravenclaw.”
She walked away, looking suspiciously back at them.
Harry and Ron hurried down the stone steps into the
darkness, their footsteps echoing particularly loudly
as Crabbe’s and Goyle’s huge feet hit the floor, feeling
that this wasn’t going to be as easy as they had
hoped.
The labyrinthine passages were deserted. They walked
deeper and deeper under the school, constantly
checking their watches to see how much time they
had left. After a quarter of an hour, just when they
were getting desperate, they heard a sudden
movement ahead.
“Ha!” said Ron excitedly. “There’s one of them now!”
The figure was emerging from a side room. As they
hurried nearer, however, their hearts sank. It wasn’t a
Slytherin, it was Percy.
“What’re you doing down here?” said Ron in surprise.
Percy looked affronted.
“That,” he said stiffly, “is none of your business. It’s
Crabbe, isn’t it?”
“Wh — oh, yeah,” said Ron.
“Well, get off to your dormitories,” said Percy sternly.
“It’s not safe to go wandering around dark corridors
these days.”
“You are,” Ron pointed out.
“I,” said Percy, drawing himself up, “am a prefect.
Nothing’s about to attack me.”
A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron.
Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them, and for the
first time in his life, Harry was pleased to see him.
“There you are,” he drawled, looking at them. “Have
you two been pigging out in the Great Hall all this
time? I’ve been looking for you; I want to show you
something really funny.”
Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy.
“And what’re you doing down here, Weasley?” he
sneered.
Percy looked outraged.
“You want to show a bit more respect to a school
prefect!” he said. “I don’t like your attitude!”
Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron to
follow him. Harry almost said something apologetic to

Percy but caught himself just in time. He and Ron
hurried after Malfoy, who said as they turned into the
next passage, “That Peter Weasley — ”
“Percy,” Ron corrected him automatically.
“Whatever,” said Malfoy. “I’ve noticed him sneaking
around a lot lately. And I bet I know what he’s up to.
He thinks he’s going to catch Slytherin’s heir single-
handed.”
He gave a short, derisive laugh. Harry and Ron
exchanged excited looks.
Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare, damp stone wall.
“What’s the new password again?” he said to Harry.
“Er — ” said Harry.
“Oh, yeah — pure-blood\” said Malfoy, not listening,
and a stone door concealed in the wall slid open.
Malfoy marched through it, and Harry and Ron
followed him.
The Slytherin common room was a long, low
underground room with rough stone walls and ceiling
from which round, greenish lamps were hanging on
chains. A fire was crackling under an elaborately
carved mantelpiece ahead of them, and several
Slytherins were silhouetted around it in high-backed
chairs.
“Wait here,” said Malfoy to Harry and Ron, motioning
them to a pair of empty chairs set back from the fire.
“I’ll go and get it — my father’s just sent it to me — ”
Wondering what Malfoy was going to show them,
Harry and Ron sat down, doing their best to look at
home.
Malfoy came back a minute later, holding what looked
like a newspaper clipping. He thrust it under Ron’s
nose.
“That’ll give you a laugh,” he said.
Harry saw Ron's eyes widen in shock. He read the
clipping quickly, gave a very forced laugh, and
handed it to Harry.
It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet, and it
said:
INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC
Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle
Artifacts Office, was today fined fifty Galleons for
bewitching a Muggle car.
Mr. Lucius Malfoy, a governor of Hogwarts School of
Witchcraft and Wizardry, where the enchanted car
crashed earlier this year, called today for Mr.
Weasley’s resignation.
“Weasley has brought the Ministry into disrepute,”
Mr. Malfoy told our reporter. “He is clearly unfit to
draw up our laws and his ridiculous Muggle
Protection Act should be scrapped immediately.”
Mr. Weasley was unavailable for comment, although
his wife told reporters to clear off or she’d set the
family ghoul on them.
“Well?” said Malfoy impatiently as Harry handed the
clipping back to him. “Don’t you think it’s funny?”
“Ha, ha,” said Harry bleakly.
“Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he should
snap his wand in half and go and join them,” said
Malfoy scornfully. “You’d never know the Weasleys
were purebloods, the way they behave.”
Ron’s — or rather, Crabbe’s — face was contorted
with fury.
“What’s up with you, Crabbe?” snapped Malfoy.
“Stomachache,” Ron grunted.
“Well, go up to the hospital wing and give all those
Mudbloods a kick from me,” said Malfoy, snickering.
“You know, I’m surprised the Daily Prophet hasn’t
reported all these attacks yet,” he went on
thoughtfully. “I suppose Dumbledore’s trying to hush
it all up. He’ll be sacked if it doesn’t stop soon.
Father’s always said old Dumbledore’s the worst thing
that’s ever happened to this place. He loves Muggle-
borns. A decent headmaster would never ’ve let slime
like that Creevey in.”
Malfoy started taking pictures with an imaginary
camera and did a cruel but accurate impression of
Colin: “ ‘Potter, can I have your picture, Potter? Can I
have your autograph? Can I lick your shoes, please,
Potter?’ ”
He dropped his hands and looked at Harry and Ron.
“What’s the matter with you two?”
Far too late, Harry and Ron forced themselves to
laugh, but Malfoy seemed satisfied; perhaps Crabbe
and Goyle were always slow on the uptake.
“Saint Potter, the Mudbloods’ friend,” said Malfoy
slowly. “He’s another one with no proper wizard
feeling, or he wouldn’t go around with that jumped-up
Granger Mudblood. And people think he’s Slytherin’s
heir!”
Harry and Ron waited with bated breath: Malfoy was
surely seconds away from telling them it was him —
but then —
“I wish I knew who it is,” said Malfoy petulantly. “I
could help them.”
Ron’s jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even more
clueless than usual. Fortunately, Malfoy didn’t notice,
and Harry, thinking fast, said, “You must have some
idea who’s behind it all. ...”
“You know I haven’t, Goyle, how many times do I have
to tell you?” snapped Malfoy. “And Father won’t tell
me anything about the last time the Chamber was
opened either. Of course, it was fifty years ago, so it
was before his time, but he knows all about it, and he
says that it was all kept quiet and it’ll look suspicious
if I know too much about it. But I know one thing —
last time the Chamber of Secrets was opened, a
Mudblood died. So I bet it’s a matter of time before
one of them’s killed this time. ... I hope it’s Granger,”
he said with relish.
Ron was clenching Crabbe ’s gigantic fists. Feeling
that it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron punched
Malfoy, Harry shot him a warning look and said,
“D’you know if the person who opened the Chamber
last time was caught?”

“Oh, yeah ... whoever it was was expelled,” said
Malfoy. “They’re probably still in Azkaban.” “Azkaban?” said Harry, puzzled.
“Azkaban — the wizard prison , Goyle,” said Malfoy,
looking at him in disbelief. “Honestly, if you were any
slower, you’d be going backward.”
He shifted restlessly in his chair and said, “Father
says to keep my head down and let the Heir of
Slytherin get on with it. He says the school needs
ridding of all the Mudblood filth, but not to get mixed
up in it. Of course, he’s got a lot on his plate at the
moment. You know the Ministry of Magic raided our
manor last week?”
Harry tried to force Goyle ’s dull face into a look of
concern.
“Yeah ...” said Malfoy. “Luckily, they didn’t find much.
Father’s got some very valuable Dark Arts stuff. But
luckily, we’ve got our own secret chamber under the
drawing-room floor — ”
“Ho!” said Ron.
Malfoy looked at him. So did Harry. Ron blushed.
Even his hair was turning red. His nose was also
slowly lengthening — their hour was up, Ron was
turning back into himself, and from the look of horror
he was suddenly giving Harry, he must be, too.
They both jumped to their feet.
“Medicine for my stomach,” Ron grunted, and without
further ado they sprinted the length of the Slytherin
common room, hurled themselves at the stone wall,
and dashed up the passage, hoping against hope that

Malfoy hadn’t noticed anything. Harry could feel his
feet slipping around in Goyle’s huge shoes and had to
hoist up his robes as he shrank; they crashed up the
steps into the dark entrance hall, which was full of a
muffled pounding coming from the closet where
they’d locked Crabbe and Goyle. Leaving their shoes
outside the closet door, they sprinted in their socks
up the marble staircase toward Moaning Myrtle’s
bathroom.
“Well, it wasn’t a complete waste of time,” Ron
panted, closing the bathroom door behind them. “I
know we still haven’t found out who’s doing the
attacks, but I’m going to write to Dad tomorrow and
tell him to check under the Malfoys’ drawing room.”
Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror. He was
back to normal. He put his glasses on as Ron
hammered on the door of Hermione’s stall.
“Hermione, come out, we’ve got loads to tell you — ”
“Go away!” Hermione squeaked.
Harry and Ron looked at each other.
“What’s the matter?” said Ron. “You must be back to
normal by now, we are — ”
But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stall
door. Harry had never seen her looking so happy.
“Ooooooh, wait till you see,” she said. “It’s awful — ”
They heard the lock slide back and Hermione
emerged, sobbing, her robes pulled up over her head.
“What’s up?” said Ron uncertainly. “Have you still got
Millicent’s nose or something?”

Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into the
sink.
Her face was covered in black fur. Her eyes had
turned yellow and there were long, pointed ears
poking through her hair.
“It was a c-cat hair!” she howled. “M-Millicent
Bulstrode m-must have a cat! And the p-potion isn’t
supposed to be used for animal transformations!”
“Uh-oh,” said Ron.
“You’ll be teased something dreadful,” said Myrtle
happily.
“It’s okay, Hermione,” said Harry quickly. “We’ll take
you up to the hospital wing. Madam Pomfrey never
asks too many questions. ...”
It took a long time to persuade Hermione to leave the
bathroom. Moaning Myrtle sped them on their way
with a hearty guffaw. “Wait till everyone finds out
you’ve got a tail\”
* V
THE VERY SECRET DIARY
Hermione remained in the hospital wing for several
weeks. There was a flurry of rumor about her
disappearance when the rest of the school arrived
back from their Christmas holidays, because of
course everyone thought that she had been attacked.
So many students filed past the hospital wing trying
to catch a glimpse of her that Madam Pomfrey took
out her curtains again and placed them around
Hermione’s bed, to spare her the shame of being seen
with a furry face.
Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening. When
the new term started, they brought her each day’s
homework.
“If I’d sprouted whiskers, I’d take a break from work,”
said Ron, tipping a stack of books onto Hermione’s
bedside table one evening.
“Don’t be silly, Ron, I’ve got to keep up,” said
Hermione briskly. Her spirits were greatly improved
by the fact that all the hair had gone from her face
  and her eyes were turning slowly back to brown. “I
don’t suppose you’ve got any new leads?” she added
in a whisper, so that Madam Pomfrey couldn’t hear
her.
“Nothing,” said Harry gloomily.
“I was so sure it was Malfoy,” said Ron, for about the
hundredth time.
“What’s that?” asked Harry, pointing to something
gold sticking out from under Hermione’s pillow.
“Just a get well card,” said Hermione hastily, trying to
poke it out of sight, but Ron was too quick for her. He
pulled it out, flicked it open, and read aloud:
“To Miss Granger, wishing you a speedy recovery, from
your concerned teacher, Professor Gilderoy Lockhart,
Order of Merlin, Third Class, Honorary Member of the
Dark Force Defense League, and five-time winner of
Witch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award.”
Ron looked up at Hermione, disgusted.
“You sleep with this under your pillow?”
But Hermione was spared answering by Madam
Pomfrey sweeping over with her evening dose of
medicine.
“Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke you’ve ever met, or
what?” Ron said to Harry as they left the infirmary
and started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower.
Snape had given them so much homework, Harry
thought he was likely to be in the sixth year before he
finished it. Ron was just saying he wished he had
asked Hermione how many rat tails you were
supposed to add to a Hair-Raising Potion when an

angry outburst from the floor above reached their
ears.
“That’s Filch,” Harry muttered as they hurried up the
stairs and paused, out of sight, listening hard.
“You don’t think someone else’s been attacked?” said
Ron tensely.
They stood still, their heads inclined toward Filch’s
voice, which sounded quite hysterical.
“ — even more work for me! Mopping all night, like I
haven’t got enough to do! No, this is the final straw, I’m
going to Dumbledore — ”
His footsteps receded along the out-of-sight corridor
and they heard a distant door slam.
They poked their heads around the corner. Filch had
clearly been manning his usual lookout post: They
were once again on the spot where Mrs. Norris had
been attacked. They saw at a glance what Filch had
been shouting about. A great flood of water stretched
over half the corridor, and it looked as though it was
still seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtle’s
bathroom. Now that Filch had stopped shouting, they
could hear Myrtle’s wails echoing off the bathroom
walls.
“Now what’s up with her?” said Ron.
“Let’s go and see,” said Harry, and holding their robes
over their ankles they stepped through the great wash
of water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign,
ignored it as always, and entered.
Moaning Myrtle was crying, if possible, louder and
harder than ever before. She seemed to be hiding

down her usual toilet. It was dark in the bathroom
because the candles had been extinguished in the
great rush of water that had left both walls and floor
soaking wet.
“What’s up, Myrtle?” said Harry.
“Who’s that?” glugged Myrtle miserably. “Come to
throw something else at me?”
Harry waded across to her stall and said, “Why would
I throw something at you?”
“Don’t ask me,” Myrtle shouted, emerging with a wave
of yet more water, which splashed onto the already
sopping floor. “Here I am, minding my own business,
and someone thinks it’s funny to throw a book at me. “But it can’t hurt you if someone throws something at
you,” said Harry, reasonably. “I mean, it’d just go
right through you, wouldn’t it?”
He had said the wrong thing. Myrtle puffed herself up
and shrieked, “Let’s all throw books at Myrtle,
because she can’t feel it! Ten points if you can get it
through her stomach! Fifty points if it goes through
her head! Well, ha, ha, ha! What a lovely game, I don’t
think!”
“Who threw it at you, anyway?” asked Harry.
“I don’t know. ... I was just sitting in the U-bend,
thinking about death, and it fell right through the top
of my head,” said Myrtle, glaring at them. “It’s over
there, it got washed out. ...”
Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtle
was pointing. A small, thin book lay there. It had a

shabby black cover and was as wet as everything else
in the bathroom. Harry stepped forward to pick it up,
but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back.
“What?” said Harry.
“Are you cray?” said Ron. “It could be dangerous.”
“ Dangerous ?” said Harry, laughing. “Come off it, how
could it be dangerous?”
“You’d be surprised,” said Ron, who was looking
apprehensively at the book. “Some of the books the
Ministry’s confiscated — Dad’s told me — there was
one that burned your eyes out. And everyone who
read Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for the
rest of their lives. And some old witch in Bath had a
book that you could never stop reading ! You just had
to wander around with your nose in it, trying to do
everything one-handed. And — ”
“All right, I’ve got the point,” said Harry.
The little book lay on the floor, nondescript and
soggy.
“Well, we won’t find out unless we look at it,” he said,
and he ducked around Ron and picked it up off the
floor.
Harry saw at once that it was a diary, and the faded
year on the cover told him it was fifty years old. He
opened it eagerly. On the first page he could just
make out the name “T. M. Riddle” in smudged ink.
“Hang on,” said Ron, who had approached cautiously
and was looking over Harry’s shoulder. “I know that
name. ... T. M. Riddle got an award for special
services to the school fifty years ago.”

“How on earth d’you know that?” said Harry in
amazement.
“Because Filch made me polish his shield about fifty
times in detention,” said Ron resentfully. “That was
the one I burped slugs all over. If you’d wiped slime
off a name for an hour, you’d remember it, too.”
Harry peeled the wet pages apart. They were
completely blank. There wasn’t the faintest trace of
writing on any of them, not even Auntie Mabel’s
birthday, or dentist, half-past three.
“He never wrote in it,” said Harry, disappointed.
“I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away?” said
Ron curiously.
Harry turned to the back cover of the book and saw
the printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall Road,
London.
“He must’ve been Muggle-born,” said Harry
thoughtfully. “To have bought a diary from Vauxhall
Road. ...”
“Well, it’s not much use to you,” said Ron. He
dropped his voice. “Fifty points if you can get it
through Myrtle’s nose.”
Harry, however, pocketed it.
Hermione left the hospital wing, de-whiskered, tail-
less, and fur-free, at the beginning of February. On
her first evening back in Gryffindor Tower, Harry
showed her T. M. Riddle’s diary and told her the story
of how they had found it.
“Oooh, it might have hidden powers,” said Hermione
enthusiastically, taking the diary and looking at it
closely.
“If it has, it’s hiding them very well,” said Ron. “Maybe
it’s shy. I don’t know why you don’t chuck it, Harry.”
“I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it,” said
Harry. “I wouldn’t mind knowing how Riddle got an
award for special services to Hogwarts either.”
“Could’ve been anything,” said Ron. “Maybe he got
thirty O.W.L.s or saved a teacher from the giant
squid. Maybe he murdered Myrtle; that would’ve done
everyone a favor. ...”
But Harry could tell from the arrested look on
Hermione ’s face that she was thinking what he was
thinking.
“What?” said Ron, looking from one to the other.
“Well, the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty years
ago, wasn’t it?” he said. “That’s what Malfoy said.”
“Yeah ...” said Ron slowly.
“And this diary is fifty years old,” said Hermione,
tapping it excitedly.
“So?”
“Oh, Ron, wake up,” snapped Hermione. “We know
the person who opened the Chamber last time was
expelled fifty years ago. We know T. M. Riddle got an
award for special services to the school fifty years
ago. Well, what if Riddle got his special award for
catching the Heir of Slytherin? His diary would
probably tell us everything — where the Chamber is,

and how to open it, and what sort of creature lives in
it — the person who’s behind the attacks this time
wouldn’t want that lying around, would they?”
“That’s a brilliant theory, Hermione,” said Ron, “with
just one tiny little flaw. There’s nothing written in his
diary.”
But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag.
“It might be invisible ink!” she whispered.
She tapped the diary three times and said,
“Aparecium\”
Nothing happened. Undaunted, Hermione shoved her
hand back into her bag and pulled out what appeared
to be a bright red eraser.
“It’s a Revealer, I got it in Diagon Alley,” she said.
She rubbed hard on January first. Nothing happened.
“I’m telling you, there’s nothing to find in there,” said
Ron. “Riddle just got a diary for Christmas and
couldn’t be bothered filling it in.”
Harry couldn’t explain, even to himself, why he didn’t
just throw Riddle’s diary away. The fact was that even
though he knew the diary was blank, he kept
absentmindedly picking it up and turning the pages,
as though it were a story he wanted to finish. And
while Harry was sure he had never heard the name T.
M. Riddle before, it still seemed to mean something to
him, almost as though Riddle was a friend he’d had
when he was very small, and had half-forgotten. But
this was absurd. He’d never had friends before
Hogwarts, Dudley had made sure of that.
Nevertheless, Harry was determined to find out more
about Riddle, so next day at break, he headed for the
trophy room to examine Riddle’s special award,
accompanied by an interested Hermione and a
thoroughly unconvinced Ron, who told them he’d
seen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime.
Riddle’s burnished gold shield was tucked away in a
corner cabinet. It didn’t carry details of why it had
been given to him (“Good thing, too, or it’d be even
bigger and I’d still be polishing it,” said Ron).
However, they did find Riddle’s name on an old Medal
for Magical Merit, and on a list of old Head Boys.
“He sounds like Percy,” said Ron, wrinkling his nose
in disgust. “Prefect, Head Boy ... probably top of every
class — ”
“You say that like it’s a bad thing,” said Hermione in a
slightly hurt voice.
The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwarts
again. Inside the castle, the mood had grown more
hopeful. There had been no more attacks since those
on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick, and Madam
Pomfrey was pleased to report that the Mandrakes
were becoming moody and secretive, meaning that
they were fast leaving childhood.
“The moment their acne clears up, they’ll be ready for
repotting again,” Harry heard her telling Filch kindly
one afternoon. “And after that, it won’t be long until
we’re cutting them up and stewing them. You’ll have
Mrs. Norris back in no time.”
Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or her
nerve, thought Harry. It must be getting riskier and
riskier to open the Chamber of Secrets, with the
school so alert and suspicious. Perhaps the monster,

whatever it was, was even now settling itself down to
hibernate for another fifty years. ... Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didn’t take this cheerful
view. He was still convinced that Harry was the guilty
one, that he had “given himself away” at the Dueling
Club. Peeves wasn’t helping matters; he kept popping
up in the crowded corridors singing “Oh, Potter, you
rotter ...” now with a dance routine to match.
Gilderoy Lockhart seemed to think he himself had
made the attacks stop. Harry overheard him telling
Professor McGonagall so while the Gryffindors were
lining up for Transfiguration.
“I don’t think there’ll be any more trouble, Minerva,”
he said, tapping his nose knowingly and winking. “I
think the Chamber has been locked for good this
time. The culprit must have known it was only a
matter of time before I caught him. Rather sensible to
stop now, before I came down hard on him.
“You know, what the school needs now is a morale-
booster. Wash away the memories of last term! I won’t
say any more just now, but I think I know just the
thing. ...”
He tapped his nose again and strode off.
Lockhart’s idea of a morale-booster became clear at
breakfast time on February fourteenth. Harry hadn’t
had much sleep because of a late-running Quidditch
practice the night before, and he hurried down to the
Great Hall, slightly late. He thought, for a moment,
that he’d walked through the wrong doors.
The walls were all covered with large, lurid pink
flowers. Worse still, heart-shaped confetti was falling
from the pale blue ceiling. Harry went over to the

Gryffindor table, where Ron was sitting looking
sickened, and Hermione seemed to have been
overcome with giggles.
“What’s going on?” Harry asked them, sitting down
and wiping confetti off his bacon.
Ron pointed to the teachers’ table, apparently too
disgusted to speak. Lockhart, wearing lurid pink
robes to match the decorations, was waving for
silence. The teachers on either side of him were
looking stony-faced. From where he sat, Harry could
see a muscle going in Professor McGonagall’s cheek.
Snape looked as though someone had just fed him a
large beaker of Skele-Gro.
“Happy Valentine’s Day!” Lockhart shouted. “And may
I thank the forty-six people who have so far sent me
cards! Yes, I have taken the liberty of arranging this
little surprise for you all — and it doesn’t end here!”
Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors to
the entrance hall marched a dozen surly-looking
dwarfs. Not just any dwarfs, however. Lockhart had
them all wearing golden wings and carrying harps.
“My friendly, card-carrying cupids!” beamed Lockhart.
“They will be roving around the school today
delivering your valentines! And the fun doesn’t stop
here! I’m sure my colleagues will want to enter into
the spirit of the occasion! Why not ask Professor
Snape to show you how to whip up a Love Potion! And
while you’re at it, Professor Flitwick knows more
about Entrancing Enchantments than any wizard I’ve
ever met, the sly old dog!”
Professor Flitwick buried his face in his hands. Snape
was looking as though the first person to ask him for
a Love Potion would be force-fed poison.

“Please, Hermione, tell me you weren’t one of the
forty-six,” said Ron as they left the Great Hall for their
first lesson. Hermione suddenly became very
interested in searching her bag for her schedule and
didn’t answer.
All day long, the dwarfs kept barging into their
classes to deliver valentines, to the annoyance of the
teachers, and late that afternoon as the Gryffindors
were walking upstairs for Charms, one of the dwarfs
caught up with Harry.
“Oy, you! ’Arry Potter!” shouted a particularly grim-
looking dwarf, elbowing people out of the way to get to
Harry.
Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentine
in front of a line of first years, which happened to
include Ginny Weasley, Harry tried to escape. The
dwarf, however, cut his way through the crowd by
kicking people’s shins, and reached him before he’d
gone two paces.
“I’ve got a musical message to deliver to ’Arry Potter in
person,” he said, twanging his harp in a threatening
sort of way.
“Not here,” Harry hissed, trying to escape.
“Stay stilll” grunted the dwarf, grabbing hold of
Harry’s bag and pulling him back.
“Let me go!” Harry snarled, tugging.
With a loud ripping noise, his bag split in two. His
books, wand, parchment, and quill spilled onto the
floor and his ink bottle smashed over everything.
Harry scrambled around, trying to pick it all up
before the dwarf started singing, causing something of
a holdup in the corridor.
“What’s going on here?” came the cold, drawling voice
of Draco Malfoy. Harry started stuffing everything
feverishly into his ripped bag, desperate to get away
before Malfoy could hear his musical valentine.
“What’s all this commotion?” said another familiar
voice as Percy Weasley arrived.
Losing his head, Harry tried to make a run for it, but
the dwarf seized him around the knees and brought
him crashing to the floor.
“Right,” he said, sitting on Harry’s ankles. “Here is
your singing valentine:
His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad,
His hair is as dark as a blackboard.
I wish he was mine, he’s really divine,
The hero who conquered the Dark Lord.”
Harry would have given all the gold in Gringotts to
evaporate on the spot. Trying valiantly to laugh along
with everyone else, he got up, his feet numb from the
weight of the dwarf, as Percy Weasley did his best to
disperse the crowd, some of whom were crying with
mirth.
“Off you go, off you go, the bell rang five minutes ago,
off to class, now,” he said, shooing some of the
younger students away. “And you, Malfoy — ”
Harry, glancing over, saw Malfoy stoop and snatch up
something. Leering, he showed it to Crabbe and
Goyle, and Harry realized that he’d got Riddle’s diary.
“Give that back,” said Harry quietly.
“Wonder what Potter’s written in this?” said Malfoy,
who obviously hadn’t noticed the year on the cover
and thought he had Harry’s own diary. A hush fell
over the onlookers. Ginny was staring from the diary
to Harry, looking terrified.
“Hand it over, Malfoy,” said Percy sternly.
“When I’ve had a look,” said Malfoy, waving the diary
tauntingly at Harry.
Percy said, “As a school prefect — ” but Harry had lost
his temper. He pulled out his wand and shouted,
“ ExpelliarmusV’ and just as Snape had disarmed
Lockhart, so Malfoy found the diary shooting out of
his hand into the air. Ron, grinning broadly, caught
it.
“Harry!” said Percy loudly. “No magic in the corridors.
I’ll have to report this, you know!”
But Harry didn’t care, he was one-up on Malfoy, and
that was worth five points from Gryffindor any day.
Malfoy was looking furious, and as Ginny passed him
to enter her classroom, he yelled spitefully after her,
“I don’t think Potter liked your valentine much!”
Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran into
class. Snarling, Ron pulled out his wand, too, but
Harry pulled him away. Ron didn’t need to spend the
whole of Charms belching slugs.
It wasn’t until they had reached Professor Flitwick’s
class that Harry noticed something rather odd about
Riddle’s diary. All his other books were drenched in
scarlet ink. The diary, however, was as clean as it had
been before the ink bottle had smashed all over it. He
tried to point this out to Ron, but Ron was having
trouble with his wand again; large purple bubbles
were blossoming out of the end, and he wasn’t much
interested in anything else. Jc Jc Jc Harry went to bed before anyone else in his
dormitory that night. This was partly because he
didn’t think he could stand Fred and George singing,
“His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad” one
more time, and partly because he wanted to examine
Riddle’s diary again, and knew that Ron thought he
was wasting his time.
Harry sat on his four-poster and flicked through the
blank pages, not one of which had a trace of scarlet
ink on it. Then he pulled a new bottle out of his
bedside cabinet, dipped his quill into it, and dropped
a blot onto the first page of the diary.
The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second and
then, as though it was being sucked into the page,
vanished. Excited, Harry loaded up his quill a second
time and wrote, “My name is Harry Potter.”
The words shone momentarily on the page and they,
too, sank without trace. Then, at last, something
happened.
Oozing back out of the page, in his very own ink,
came words Harry had never written.
“Hello, Harry Potter. My name is Tom Riddle. How did
you come by my diary?”
These words, too, faded away, but not before Harry
had started to scribble back.
“Someone tried to flush it down a toilet.”
He waited eagerly for Riddle’s reply.
“Lucky that I recorded my memories in some more
lasting way than ink. But I always knew that there
would be those who would not want this diary read.”
“What do you mean?” Harry scrawled, blotting the
page in his excitement.
“I mean that this diary holds memories of terrible
things. Things that were covered up. Things that
happened at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and
Wizardry.”
“That’s where I am now,” Harry wrote quickly. “I’m at
Hogwarts, and horrible stuff’s been happening. Do
you know anything about the Chamber of Secrets?”
His heart was hammering. Riddle’s reply came
quickly, his writing becoming untidier, as though he
was hurrying to tell all he knew.
“Of course I know about the Chamber of Secrets. In my
day, they told us it was a legend, that it did not exist.
But this was a lie. In my fifth year, the Chamber was
opened and the monster attacked several students,
finally killing one. I caught the person who’d opened
the Chamber and he was expelled. But the
headmaster, Professor Dippet, ashamed that such a
thing had happened at Hogwarts, forbade me to tell
the truth. A story was given out that the girl had died

in a freak accident They gave me a nice, shiny,
engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keep
my mouth shut But I knew it could happen again. The
monster lived on, and the one who had the power to
release it was not imprisoned.”
Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to write
back.
“It’s happening again now. There have been three
attacks and no one seems to know who’s behind
them. Who was it last time?”
“ I can show you, if you like,” came Riddle’s reply. “You
don’t have to take my word for it. I can take you inside
my memory of the night when I caught him.”
Harry hesitated, his quill suspended over the diary.
What did Riddle mean? How could he be taken inside
somebody else’s memory? He glanced nervously at the
door to the dormitory, which was growing dark. When
he looked back at the diary, he saw fresh words
forming.
“Let me show you.”
Harry paused for a fraction of a second and then
wrote two letters.
“OK.”
The pages of the diary began to blow as though
caught in a high wind, stopping halfway through the
month of June. Mouth hanging open, Harry saw that
the little square for June thirteenth seemed to have
turned into a minuscule television screen. His hands
trembling slightly, he raised the book to press his eye
against the little window, and before he knew what
was happening, he was tilting forward; the window

was widening, he felt his body leave his bed, and he
was pitched headfirst through the opening in the
page, into a whirl of color and shadow.
He felt his feet hit solid ground, and stood, shaking,
as the blurred shapes around him came suddenly
into focus.
He knew immediately where he was. This circular
room with the sleeping portraits was Dumbledore’s
office — but it wasn’t Dumbledore who was sitting
behind the desk. A wizened, frail-looking wizard, bald
except for a few wisps of white hair, was reading a
letter by candlelight. Harry had never seen this man
before.
